Abdominal aortic aneurysm|A pulsating feeling near the navel	Deep, constant pain in your abdomen or on the side of your abdomen	Back pain	|Quit smoking or chewing tobacco.	Keep your blood pressure under control.	Get regular exercise.	Reduce cholesterol and fat in your diet.	
Absence seizure|Sudden stop in motion without falling	Lip smacking	Eyelid flutters	Chewing motions	Finger rubbing	Small movements of both hands	|Treatments and drugs	Coping and support	
Achilles tendinitis||Rest. You may need to avoid exercise for several days or switch to an activity that doesn't strain the Achilles tendon, such as swimming. In severe cases, you may need to wear a walking boot and use crutches.	Ice. To decrease pain or swelling, apply an ice pack to the tendon for about 15 minutes after exercising or when you experience pain.	Compression. Wraps or compressive elastic bandages can help reduce swelling and reduce movement of the tendon.	Elevation. Raise the affected foot above the level of your heart to reduce swelling. Sleep with your affected foot elevated at night.	
Achilles tendon rupture|Pain, possibly severe, and swelling near your heel	An inability to bend your foot downward or "push off" the injured leg when you walk	An inability to stand on your toes on the injured leg	A popping or snapping sound when the injury occurs	|
Acne|Whiteheads (closed plugged pores)	Blackheads (open plugged pores — the oil turns brown when it is exposed to air)	Small red, tender bumps (papules) 	Pimples (pustules), which are papules with pus at their tips 	Large, solid, painful lumps beneath the surface of the skin (nodules) 	Painful, pus-filled lumps beneath the surface of the skin (cystic lesions) 	| Wash problem areas with a gentle cleanser. Twice a day, use your hands to wash your face with a mild soap and warm water. If you tend to develop acne around your hairline, shampoo your hair every day. Avoid certain products, such as facial scrubs, astringents and masks, because they tend to irritate skin, which can worsen acne. Excessive washing and scrubbing also can irritate skin. And be gentle while shaving affected skin. 	 Try over-the-counter acne products to dry excess oil and promote peeling. Look for products containing benzoyl peroxide as the active ingredient. You might also try products containing sulfur, resorcinol or salicylic acid. Nonprescription acne medications may cause initial side effects — such as redness, dryness and scaling — that often improve after the first month of using them. The Food and Drug Administration warns that some popular nonprescription acne lotions, cleansers and other skin products can cause a rare but serious reaction. 	Avoid irritants. You may want to avoid oily or greasy cosmetics, sunscreens, hairstyling products or acne concealers. Use products labeled water-based or noncomedogenic, which means they are less likely to cause acne.	Use an oil-free moisturizer with sunscreen. For some people, the sun worsens acne. And some acne medications make you more susceptible to the sun's rays. Check with your doctor to see if your medication is one of these. If it is, stay out of the sun as much as possible. Regularly use a nonoily (noncomedogenic) moisturizer that includes a sunscreen.	Watch what touches your skin. Keep your hair clean and off your face. Also avoid resting your hands or objects, such as telephone receivers, on your face. Tight clothing or hats also can pose a problem, especially if you're sweating. Sweat and oils can contribute to acne.	Don't pick or squeeze blemishes. Doing so can cause infection or scarring.	
Acoustic neuroma|Hearing loss, usually gradual — although in some cases sudden — and occurring on only one side or more pronounced on one side	Ringing (tinnitus) in the affected ear	Unsteadiness, loss of balance	Dizziness (vertigo)	Facial numbness and very rarely, weakness	|
Actinic keratosis|Rough, dry or scaly patch of skin, usually less than 1 inch (2.5 centimeters) in diameter	Flat to slightly raised patch or bump on the top layer of skin	In some cases, a hard, wart-like surface	Color as varied as pink, red or brown, or flesh-colored	Itching or burning in the affected area	|
Acute coronary syndrome|Chest pain (angina) that feels like burning, pressure or tightness 	Pain elsewhere in the body, such as the left upper arm or jaw (referred pain) 	Nausea 	Vomiting 	Shortness of breath (dyspnea) 	Sudden, heavy sweating (diaphoresis) 	|Don't smoke. If you smoke, stop to improve your heart's health. Talk to your doctor if you're having trouble with quitting. It's also important to stay away from secondhand smoke. 	Eat a heart-healthy diet. Too much saturated fat and cholesterol in your diet can narrow arteries to your heart. Follow the advice of your doctor and dietitian on eating a heart-healthy diet that includes plenty of whole grains, lean meat, low-fat dairy, and fruits and vegetables. Also, limit saturated and trans fats, as well as the salt in your diet. 	Be active. Physical activity and regular exercise helps reduce your risk of acute coronary syndrome by helping you to achieve and maintain a healthy weight, and control diabetes, elevated cholesterol and high blood pressure. Exercise doesn't have to be vigorous. For example, walking 30 minutes a day five days a week can improve your health. The 30 minutes can even be broken down into three 10-minute periods of activity. Physical activity doesn't necessarily mean working out on a treadmill or in a gym. Activities such as gardening, dancing and household chores can all help reduce your risk of heart disease. Slow down or rest if activity triggers chest pain, and let your doctor know if this is new pain. 	Check your cholesterol. Have your blood cholesterol levels checked regularly, through a blood test at your doctor's office. If your cholesterol levels are undesirably high, your doctor can prescribe changes to your diet and medications to help lower the numbers and protect your cardiovascular health. It's recommended that overall cholesterol levels be below 200 milligrams per deciliter (mg/dL), and that high-density lipoprotein (HDL, or "good") cholesterol levels be above 40 mg/dL for men and above 50 mg/dL for women. Recommended low-density lipoprotein (LDL, or "bad") cholesterol levels depend on your heart disease risk. For those with a low risk of heart disease, LDL cholesterol should be below 130 mg/dL. In people with a moderate risk of heart disease, a level of less than 100 mg/dL is recommended. For those with a high risk of heart disease, including people who've already had a heart attack, it's recommended that LDL levels be below 70 mg/dL. 	Control your blood pressure. Have your blood pressure checked at least every two years. Your doctor may recommend more frequent checks if you have high blood pressure or a history of heart disease. Normal blood pressure is less than 120/80 millimeters of mercury. 	Maintain a healthy weight. Excess weight strains your heart and can contribute to high cholesterol, high blood pressure and diabetes. Losing weight can lower your risk of acute coronary syndrome. 	Manage stress. To reduce your risk of a heart attack, reduce stress in your day-to-day activities. Rethink workaholic habits and find healthy ways to minimize or deal with stressful events in your life. Emotional stress can increase inflammation in your heart and make plaque rupture more likely. 	Drink alcohol in moderation. Drinking more than one to two alcoholic drinks a day raises blood pressure, so cut back on your drinking if necessary. If you choose to drink alcohol, do so in moderation. For healthy adults, that means up to one drink a day for women of all ages and men older than age 65, and up to two drinks a day for men age 65 and younger. One drink is equivalent to 12 ounces (360 milliliters, or mL) of beer, 4 ounces (120 mL) of wine or 1.5 ounces (45 mL) of an 80-proof liquor. 	
Acute kidney failure|Decreased urine output, although occasionally urine output remains normal	Fluid retention, causing swelling in your legs, ankles or feet	Drowsiness	Shortness of breath	Fatigue	Confusion	Nausea	Seizures or coma in severe cases	Chest pain or pressure	|Choose lower potassium foods. Your dietitian may recommend that you choose lower potassium foods. High-potassium foods include bananas, oranges, potatoes, spinach and tomatoes. Examples of low-potassium foods include apples, cabbage, green beans, grapes and strawberries.	Avoid products with added salt. Lower the amount of sodium you eat each day by avoiding products with added salt, including many convenience foods, such as frozen dinners, canned soups and fast foods. Other foods with added salt include salty snack foods, canned vegetables, and processed meats and cheeses.	Limit phosphorus. Phosphorus is a mineral found in foods, such as milk, cheese, dried beans, nuts and peanut butter. Too much phosphorus in your blood can weaken your bones and cause skin itchiness. Your dietitian can give you specific recommendations on phosphorus and how to limit it in your particular situation.	
Acute liver failure|Yellowing of your skin and eyeballs (jaundice)	Pain in your upper right abdomen	Abdominal swelling	Nausea	Vomiting	A general sense of feeling unwell (malaise)	Disorientation or confusion	Sleepiness	|
Acute lymphocytic leukemia|Bleeding from the gums	Bone pain	Fever	Frequent infections	Frequent or severe nosebleeds	Lumps caused by swollen lymph nodes in and around the neck, underarm, abdomen or groin	Pale skin	Shortness of breath	Weakness, fatigue or a general decrease in energy	|
Acute myelogenous leukemia (AML)|Fever	Bone pain	Lethargy and fatigue	Shortness of breath	Pale skin	Frequent infections	Easy bruising	Unusual bleeding, such as frequent nosebleeds and bleeding from the gums	|
ARDS|Severe shortness of breath	Labored and unusually rapid breathing	Low blood pressure	Confusion and extreme tiredness	|Quit smoking. If you smoke, seek help to quit, and avoid secondhand smoke whenever possible.	Quit alcohol. Alcohol can relax the portion of your upper airway that keeps foreign material from entering your lungs (aspiration).	Get vaccinated. The yearly flu (influenza) shot, as well as the pneumonia vaccine every five years, can reduce your risk of lung infections.	
Acute sinusitis|Drainage of a thick, yellow or greenish discharge from the nose or down the back of the throat	Nasal obstruction or congestion, causing difficulty breathing through your nose	Pain, tenderness, swelling and pressure around your eyes, cheeks, nose or forehead	Reduced sense of smell and taste	Cough, which may be worse at night	|Get plenty of rest. This will help your body fight infection and speed recovery.	Drink plenty of fluids, such as water or juice. This will help dilute mucous secretions and promote drainage. Avoid beverages that contain caffeine or alcohol, as they can be dehydrating. Drinking alcohol can also worsen the swelling of the lining of the sinuses and nose.	Moisten your sinus cavities. Drape a towel over your head as you breathe in the vapor from a bowl of hot water. Keep the vapor directed toward your face. Or take a hot shower, breathing in the warm, moist air. This will help ease pain and help mucus drain.	Apply warm compresses to your face. Place warm, damp towels around your nose, cheeks and eyes to ease facial pain.	Rinse out your nasal passages. Use a specially designed squeeze bottle (Sinus Rinse, others) or neti pot to rinse your nasal passages. This home remedy, called nasal lavage, can help clear your sinuses. If you make your own rinse, use water that's contaminant-free — distilled, sterile, previously boiled and cooled, or filtered using a filter with an absolute pore size of 1 micron or smaller — to make up the irrigation solution. Also be sure to rinse the irrigation device after each use with contaminant-free water and leave open to air-dry.	Sleep with your head elevated. This will help your sinuses drain, reducing congestion.	
Alcohol use disorder|Being unable to limit the amount of alcohol you drink	Wanting to cut down on how much you drink or making unsuccessful attempts to do so	Spending a lot of time drinking, getting alcohol or recovering from alcohol use	Feeling a strong craving or urge to drink alcohol	Failing to fulfill major obligations at work, school or home due to repeated alcohol use	Continuing to drink alcohol even though you know it's causing physical, social or interpersonal problems	Giving up or reducing social and work activities and hobbies	Using alcohol in situations where it's not safe, such as when driving or swimming	Developing a tolerance to alcohol so you need more to feel its effect or you have a reduced effect from the same amount	Experiencing withdrawal symptoms — such as nausea, sweating and shaking — when you don't drink, or drinking to avoid these symptoms	|Consider your social situation. Make it clear to your friends and family that you're not drinking alcohol. Develop a support system of friends and family who can support your recovery. You may need to distance yourself from friends and social situations that impair your recovery.	Develop healthy habits. For example, good sleep, regular physical activity, managing stress more effectively and eating well all can make it easier for you to recover from alcohol use disorder.	Do things that don't involve alcohol. You may find that many of your activities involve drinking. Replace them with hobbies or activities that are not centered around alcohol.	
Adenomyosis|Heavy or prolonged menstrual bleeding	Severe cramping or sharp, knifelike pelvic pain during menstruation (dysmenorrhea)	Menstrual cramps that last throughout your period and worsen as you get older	Pain during intercourse	Blood clots that pass during your period	|Soak in a warm bath.	Use a heating pad on your abdomen.	Take an over-the-counter anti-inflammatory medication, such as ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin IB, others).	
ADHD in children|Difficulty paying attention	Frequently daydreaming	Difficulty following through on instructions and apparently not listening	Frequently has problems organizing tasks or activities	Frequently forgetful and loses needed items, such as books, pencils or toys	Frequently fails to finish schoolwork, chores or other tasks	Easily distracted	Frequently fidgets or squirms	Difficulty remaining seated and seemly in constant motion	Excessively talkative	Frequently interrupts or intrudes on others' conversations or games	Frequently has trouble waiting for his or her turn	|Show your child lots of affection. Children need to hear that they're loved and appreciated. Focusing only on the negative aspects of your child's behavior can harm your relationship and affect self-confidence and self-esteem. If your child has a hard time accepting verbal signs of affection, a smile, a pat on the shoulder or a hug can show you care. Look for behaviors for which you can compliment your child regularly.	Take time to enjoy your child. Make an effort to accept and appreciate the parts of your child's personality that aren't so difficult. One of the best ways to do this is simply to spend time together. This should be a private time when no other children or adults interfere. Try to give your child more positive than negative attention every day.	Find ways to improve your child's self-esteem and sense of discipline. Children with ADHD often do very well with art projects, music or dance lessons, or martial arts classes, such as karate or tae kwon do. But don't force children into activities that are beyond their abilities. All children have special talents and interests that can be fostered. Small frequent successes help to build self-esteem.	Work on organization. Help your child organize and maintain a daily assignment notebook and be sure your child has a quiet place to study. Group objects in the child's room and store in clearly marked spaces. Try to help your child keep his or her environment organized and uncluttered.	Use simple words and demonstrate when giving your child directions. Speak slowly and quietly and be very specific and concrete. Give one direction at a time. Stop and make eye contact with the child before and while you're giving directions.	Try to keep a regular schedule for meals, naps and bedtime. Use a big calendar to mark special activities that will be coming up. Children with ADHD have a hard time accepting and adjusting to change. Avoid or at least warn children of sudden transitions from one activity to another.	Make sure your child is rested. Try to keep your child from becoming overtired because fatigue often makes ADHD symptoms worse.	Identify difficult situations. Try to avoid situations that are difficult for your child, such as sitting through long presentations or shopping in malls and supermarkets where the array of merchandise can be overwhelming.	Use timeouts or appropriate consequences to discipline your child.  Timeouts should be relatively brief, but long enough for your child to regain control. Children can also be expected to accept the results of the choices they make. The idea is to interrupt and defuse out-of-control behavior.	Be patient. Try to remain patient and calm when dealing with your child, even when your child is out of control. If you're calm, your child is more likely to model that behavior and become calm too.	Keep things in perspective. Be realistic in your expectations for improvement — both your own and your child's. Keep your child's developmental stage in mind.	Take a break yourself. If you're exhausted and stressed, you're a much less effective parent.	
Adult ADHD|Trouble focusing or concentrating	Restlessness	Impulsivity	Difficulty completing tasks	Disorganization	Low frustration tolerance	Frequent mood swings	Hot temper	Trouble coping with stress	Unstable relationships	|Make a list of tasks to be accomplished each day. Make sure you're not trying to do too much.	Break down tasks into smaller, more manageable steps.	Use sticky pads to write notes to yourself. Put them on the fridge, on the bathroom mirror, in the car or in other places where you'll benefit from having a reminder.	Keep an appointment book or electronic calendar to track appointments and deadlines.	Carry a notebook or electronic device with you so that you can note ideas or things you'll need to remember.	Take time to set up systems to file and organize information, both on your electronic devices and for paper documents. Get in the habit of using these systems consistently.	Follow a routine that's consistent from day to day and keep items, like keys and your wallet, in the same place.	Ask for help from family members or loved ones.	
Adjustment disorders|Sadness	Hopelessness	Lack of enjoyment	Crying spells	Nervousness	Jitteriness	Anxiety, which may include separation anxiety	Worry	Desperation	Trouble sleeping	Difficulty concentrating	Feeling overwhelmed	Thoughts of suicide	|Talk things over with caring family and friends	Try to keep eating a healthy diet	Stick to a regular sleep routine	Get regular physical activity	Engage in a hobby you enjoy	Find a support group geared toward your situation	Find support from a faith community	
Adnexal tumors|Ovaries	Fallopian tubes	Connective tissue around the ovaries or fallopian tubes	|Ovaries	Fallopian tubes	Connective tissue around the ovaries or fallopian tubes	
Adult Still's disease|Sore throat. One of the very first symptoms of adult Still's disease is a sore throat. The lymph nodes in your neck also might be swollen and tender. 	Fever. You may experience a daily fever of at least 102 F (38.9 C) for a week or longer. The fever usually peaks in the late afternoon or early evening. Sometimes, you may experience two fever spikes daily. Between episodes, your temperature will likely return to normal. 	Rash. A salmon-pink rash may come and go with the fever. The rash usually appears on your trunk, arms or legs. Physical contact, such as rubbing your skin, may provoke the rash to appear. 	Achy and swollen joints. You may find that your joints — especially your knees, wrists, ankles, elbows, hands and shoulders — are stiff, painful and inflamed. Usually, the joint discomfort lasts at least two weeks. 	Muscle pain. Muscular pain associated with adult Still's disease usually ebbs and flows with the fever, but the pain may be severe enough to disrupt your daily activities. 	|Understand your medications. Even if you're symptom-free some days, it's important to take your medications as your doctor recommends. Controlling inflammation helps reduce the risk of complications. 	Supplement your diet. If you're taking high doses of prednisone, talk to your doctor about taking more calcium and vitamin D supplements to help prevent osteoporosis. 	Keep moving. While you might not feel up to a workout if your joints ache, exercise can help you maintain your range of motion and relieve pain and stiffness. 	
Age spots (liver spots)|Are flat, oval areas of increased pigmentation	Are usually tan, brown or black	Occur on skin that has had the most sun exposure over the years, such as the backs of hands, tops of feet, face, shoulders and upper back	|Treatments and drugs	Prevention	
Agoraphobia|Fear of being alone in any situation	Fear of being in crowded places	Fear of losing control in a public place	Fear of being in places where it may be hard to leave, such as an elevator or train	Inability to leave your home (housebound) or only able to leave it if someone else goes with you	Sense of helplessness	Overdependence on others	|
Airplane ear|Moderate discomfort or pain in your ear 	Feeling of fullness or stuffiness in your ear 	Muffled hearing or slight to moderate hearing loss 	|
Albinism|Freckles	Moles, with or without pigment — moles without pigment are generally pink-colored	Large freckle-like spots (lentigines)	The ability to tan	|Use low vision aids, such as a hand-held magnifying glass, a monocular or a magnifier that attaches to glasses.	Apply sunscreen with a sun protection factor (SPF) of at least 30 that protects against both UVA and UVB light.	Avoid high-risk sun exposure, such as being outside in the middle of the day, at high altitudes, and on sunny days with thin cloud cover.	Wear protective clothing, including long-sleeved shirts, long pants and broad-rimmed hats.	Protect eyes by wearing dark, UV-blocking sunglasses or transition lenses that darken in bright light.	
Alcohol intolerance|Facial redness (flushing)	Warm, red, itchy bumps on the skin (hives)	Worsening of preexisting asthma	Runny or stuffy nose	Low blood pressure	Nausea and vomiting	Diarrhea	|
Alcohol poisoning|Confusion 	Vomiting 	Seizures 	Slow breathing (less than eight breaths a minute) 	Irregular breathing (a gap of more than 10 seconds between breaths) 	Blue-tinged skin or pale skin 	Low body temperature (hypothermia) 	Passing out (unconsciousness) and can't be awakened 	|Black coffee or caffeine — this does not counteract the effects of alcohol poisoning 	A cold shower — the shock of cold can cause a loss of consciousness 	Walking it off — this does not increase the speed alcohol leaves your body 	Sleeping it off — you can lose consciousness while asleep 	
Allergies|Sneezing	Itching of the nose, eyes or roof of the mouth	Runny, stuffy nose	Watery, red or swollen eyes (conjunctivitis)	| Sinus congestion and hay fever symptoms. These symptoms often improve with saline nasal irrigation — rinsing out the sinuses with a salt and water solution. You can use a neti pot or a specially designed squeeze bottle to flush out thickened mucus and irritants from your nose. However, improper use of a neti pot or other device can lead to infection. Use water that's distilled, sterile, previously boiled and cooled, or filtered using a filter with an absolute pore size of 1 micron or smaller to make up the irrigation solution. Prepare the saline solution with the appropriate water, using the mixture supplied by the neti pot or one you make. Be sure to rinse the irrigation device after each use with distilled, sterile, previously boiled and cooled, or filtered water and leave open to air dry. 	Household airborne allergy symptoms. Reduce your exposure to dust mites or pet dander by frequently washing bedding and stuffed toys in hot water, maintaining low humidity, regularly using a vacuum with a fine filter such as a high-efficiency particulate air (HEPA) filter and replacing carpeting with hard flooring.	Mold allergy symptoms. Reduce moisture in damp areas, such as your bath and kitchen, by using ventilation fans and dehumidifiers. Fix leaks inside and outside your home.	
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis|Difficulty walking, tripping or difficulty doing your normal daily activities	Weakness in your leg, feet or ankles	Hand weakness or clumsiness	Slurring of speech or trouble swallowing	Muscle cramps and twitching in your arms, shoulders and tongue	Difficulty holding your head up or keeping a good posture	|
Ambiguous genitalia|An enlarged clitoris, which may resemble a small penis	Closed labia, or labia that include folds and resemble a scrotum	Lumps that feel like testes in the fused labia	|
Amenorrhea|Milky nipple discharge	Hair loss	Headache	Vision changes	Excess facial hair	Pelvic pain	Acne	|Treatments and drugs	
Amnesia|Impaired ability to learn new information following the onset of amnesia (anterograde amnesia)	Impaired ability to recall past events and previously familiar information (retrograde amnesia)	|
Amniotic fluid embolism|Sudden shortness of breath	Excess fluid in the lungs (pulmonary edema)	Sudden low blood pressure	Sudden failure of the heart to effectively pump blood (cardiovascular collapse)	Life-threatening problems with blood clotting (disseminated intravascular coagulopathy)	Altered mental status, such as anxiety	Chills	Rapid heart rate or disturbances in the rhythm of the heart rate	Fetal distress, such as a slow heart rate	Seizures	Coma	Sudden fetal heart rate abnormalities	Bleeding from the uterus, incision or intravenous (IV) sites	|
Amyloidosis|Swelling of your ankles and legs	Severe fatigue and weakness	Shortness of breath	Numbness, tingling or pain in your hands or feet, especially pain in your wrist (carpal tunnel syndrome)	Diarrhea, possibly with blood, or constipation	Feeling full quickly when eating, and significant weight loss	An enlarged tongue	Skin changes, such as thickening or easy bruising, and purplish patches around the eyes	An irregular heartbeat	Difficulty swallowing	|Pace yourself. If you feel short of breath, take a break. You'll need to avoid strenuous activities, but you may be able to continue normal daily activities, such as going to work. Talk to your doctor about an appropriate level of activity for you.	Follow a balanced diet. Good nutrition is important to provide your body with adequate energy. Follow a low-salt diet if your doctor recommends it.	
Anal cancer|Bleeding from the anus or rectum	Pain in the area of the anus	A mass or growth in the anal canal	Anal itching	|
Anal itching|Anal itching is severe or persistent	You have anal bleeding	The anal area seems to be infected	You can't figure out what's causing a persistent itch	| Cleanse gently. After bowel movements, clean the area with plain water or mild soap. It may help to use moist cotton balls or a small squeeze bottle of water. Don't scrub. The goal is to keep the area clean without further irritating the skin. When traveling by air, take an empty squeeze bottle that you can readily fill with water in bathrooms. 	Dry thoroughly. After cleansing, pat the area dry with toilet paper or a towel. Or use a hair dryer set on low. Unmedicated talcum can help keep the area dry. Avoid cornstarch powder, which can foster bacterial growth. You could place a moistened or dry cotton ball against the anus to help absorb moisture. Replace it as needed.	Don't scratch. Scratching further irritates your skin and leads to persistent inflammation. You may find some relief by applying a cold compress to the area or taking a lukewarm bath. Trim your nails short and wear cotton gloves while you're sleeping to help prevent scratching.	Wear cotton underwear and loose clothing. This helps keep the area dry. Avoid wearing pantyhose and other tightfitting garments because these can trap moisture.	Avoid irritants. Avoid bubble baths, genital deodorants, perfumed soaps, moist wipes, witch hazel products and other items that might irritate the anal area. Cut back on or avoid coffee, cola, alcohol, citrus fruits, chocolate, spicy foods, tomatoes and foods that may cause diarrhea. Avoid overuse of laxatives.	Apply ointments or gels. Protect your skin from moisture by applying a thin layer of a zinc oxide ointment (Desitin, Balmex) or petroleum jelly. You could also use a 1 percent corticosteroid cream (Cortaid, Preparation H Anti-Itch Cream) two or three times a day to relieve itching. But don't use this type of cream for more than two weeks because of possible side effects, such as thinning of the skin.	Maintain regular, firm bowel movements. If soft stools or frequent bowel movements are a problem, gradually adding fiber to your diet may help. Fiber supplements, such a Metamucil or Citrucel, also may help.	
Anaphylaxis|Skin reactions, including hives along with itching, and flushed or pale skin (almost always present with anaphylaxis) 	A feeling of warmth 	The sensation of a lump in your throat 	Constriction of the airways and a swollen tongue or throat, which can cause wheezing and trouble breathing 	A weak and rapid pulse 	Nausea, vomiting or diarrhea 	Dizziness or fainting 	|
Aplastic anemia|Fatigue	Shortness of breath with exertion	Rapid or irregular heart rate	Pale skin	Frequent or prolonged infections	Unexplained or easy bruising	Nosebleeds and bleeding gums	Prolonged bleeding from cuts	Skin rash	Dizziness	Headache	|Resting when you need to. Anemia can cause fatigue and shortness of breath with even mild exertion. Take a break and rest when you need to.	Avoiding contact sports. Because of the risk of bleeding associated with a low platelet count, avoid activities that may result in a cut or fall.	Protecting yourself from germs. You can reduce your risk of infections with frequent hand-washing and by avoiding sick people. If you develop a fever or other indicators of an infection, see your doctor for treatment.	
Aneurysms| Aortic aneurysm. An aortic aneurysm forms in your aorta, a major blood vessel about the size of a garden hose. Your aorta carries blood from your heart to your vital organs. You may not know you have an aneurysm because they usually don't cause symptoms, even when they are large. However, an aneurysm can burst (rupture) or split (dissect), causing internal bleeding and often leading to death. Abdominal aortic aneurysms form along the aorta in the section that passes through your abdomen. Thoracic aortic aneurysms form along the aorta in the section that passes through your chest area. Thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysms form along the section of the aorta between your chest area and abdomen. 	 Brain aneurysm. A brain aneurysm occurs in a blood vessel supplying your brain, usually at branching points of arteries. The weakened area forms a small sac or balloon that fills with blood. Brain aneurysms can rupture and cause bleeding into your brain, resulting in a subarachnoid hemorrhage. Some small brain aneurysms, especially those located on the arteries in the front part of your brain, have a low risk of rupture. Doctors will assess the size, location and appearance of the aneurysm to clarify the risk of rupture. Medical and family history also can help clarify the risk. Doctors will then compare that risk to the risk of treatment and decide whether to manage or treat the aneurysm. 	Peripheral aneurysm. A peripheral aneurysm forms in other blood vessels in your body, including arteries in your legs, groin or neck.	| Aortic aneurysm. An aortic aneurysm forms in your aorta, a major blood vessel about the size of a garden hose. Your aorta carries blood from your heart to your vital organs. You may not know you have an aneurysm because they usually don't cause symptoms, even when they are large. However, an aneurysm can burst (rupture) or split (dissect), causing internal bleeding and often leading to death. Abdominal aortic aneurysms form along the aorta in the section that passes through your abdomen. Thoracic aortic aneurysms form along the aorta in the section that passes through your chest area. Thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysms form along the section of the aorta between your chest area and abdomen. 	 Brain aneurysm. A brain aneurysm occurs in a blood vessel supplying your brain, usually at branching points of arteries. The weakened area forms a small sac or balloon that fills with blood. Brain aneurysms can rupture and cause bleeding into your brain, resulting in a subarachnoid hemorrhage. Some small brain aneurysms, especially those located on the arteries in the front part of your brain, have a low risk of rupture. Doctors will assess the size, location and appearance of the aneurysm to clarify the risk of rupture. Medical and family history also can help clarify the risk. Doctors will then compare that risk to the risk of treatment and decide whether to manage or treat the aneurysm. 	Peripheral aneurysm. A peripheral aneurysm forms in other blood vessels in your body, including arteries in your legs, groin or neck.	
Angelman syndrome|Developmental delays, such as lack of crawling or babbling at 6 to 12 months, and intellectual disability	Lack of or minimal speech	Inability to walk, move or balance well (ataxia)	Frequent smiling and laughter	Happy, excitable personality	|
Angina|Chest pain or discomfort	Pain in your arms, neck, jaw, shoulder or back accompanying chest pain	Nausea	Fatigue	Shortness of breath	Sweating	Dizziness	|If you smoke, stop smoking.	Eat a healthy diet with limited amounts of saturated fat, lots of whole grains, and many fruits and vegetables.	Talk to your doctor about starting a safe exercise plan.	If you're overweight, talk to your doctor about weight-loss options.	Take anti-angina medications as prescribed and follow your doctor's directions.	Treat diseases or conditions that can increase your risk of angina, such as diabetes, high blood pressure and high blood cholesterol.	Because angina is often brought on by exertion, pace yourself and take rest breaks.	Avoid large meals that make you feel overly full.	Try to find ways to relax. Talk with your doctor about stress-reduction techniques.	
Anhidrosis|Little or no perspiration	Dizziness	Muscle cramps or weakness	Flushing	Feeling hot	|
Ankylosing spondylitis|The joint between the base of your spine and your pelvis	The vertebrae in your lower back	The places where your tendons and ligaments attach to bones, mainly in your spine, but sometimes along the back of your heel	The cartilage between your breastbone and ribs	Your hip and shoulder joints	|Treatments and drugs	Coping and support	
Anorgasmia|Lifelong anorgasmia. This means you've never experienced an orgasm.	Acquired anorgasmia. This means you used to have orgasms, but now experience difficulty reaching climax.	Situational anorgasmia. This means you are able to orgasm only during certain circumstances, such as during oral sex or with a certain partner. Most women can't reach orgasm through vaginal penetration alone.	Generalized anorgasmia. This means you aren't able to orgasm in any situation or with any partner.	|
Anterior prolapse (cystocele)|A feeling of fullness or pressure in your pelvis and vagina	Increased discomfort when you strain, cough, bear down or lift	A feeling that you haven't completely emptied your bladder after urinating	Repeated bladder infections	Pain or urinary leakage during sexual intercourse	In severe cases, a bulge of tissue that protrudes through your vaginal opening and may feel like sitting on an egg	|Tighten (contract) your pelvic floor muscles — the muscles you use to stop urinating.	Hold the contraction for five seconds, then relax for five seconds. (If this is too difficult, start by holding for two seconds and relaxing for three seconds.)	Work up to holding the contraction for 10 seconds at a time.	Do three sets of 10 repetitions of the exercises each day.	
Anthrax|A raised, itchy bump resembling an insect bite that quickly develops into a painless sore with a black center	Swelling in the sore and nearby lymph glands	|
Antibiotic-associated diarrhea|Loose stools 	More-frequent bowel movements 	|Drink plenty of fluids. Water is best, but fluids with added sodium and potassium (electrolytes) may be beneficial as well. Try drinking broth or watered down fruit juice. Avoid beverages that are high in sugar or contain alcohol or caffeine, such as coffee, tea and colas, which may aggravate your symptoms. 	Choose soft, easy-to-digest foods. These include applesauce, bananas and rice. Avoid high-fiber foods such as beans, nuts and vegetables. If you feel like your symptoms are improving, slowly add high-fiber foods back to your diet. 	 Take probiotics. Probiotics are organisms, such as bacteria and yeast, that can help restore a healthy balance to the intestinal tract by boosting the level of good bacteria to help defeat the harmful bacteria. Probiotics are available in capsule or liquid form and are also added to some foods, such as certain brands of yogurt. Studies confirm that some probiotics, including Lactobacillus rhamnosus and Saccharomyces boulardii, used in conjunction with antibiotics may be helpful as a treatment for antibiotic-associated diarrhea. However, further research is needed to better understand which strains of bacteria are most helpful or what doses are needed. 	Try eating several small meals, rather than a few large meals. Space meals throughout the day instead of eating two or three large ones. 	Avoid irritating foods. Stay away from spicy, fatty or fried foods and any other foods that make your symptoms worse. 	Ask about anti-diarrheal medications. In some cases of mild antibiotic-associated diarrhea, your doctor may recommend anti-diarrhea medications, such as loperamide (Imodium A-D). But check with your doctor first before taking anti-diarrheal medications because they can interfere with your body's ability to eliminate toxins and lead to serious complications. 	
Antiphospholipid syndrome|Blood clots in your legs (deep vein thrombosis, or DVT) that may travel to your lungs (pulmonary embolism)	Repeated miscarriages or stillbirths and other complications of pregnancy, such as premature delivery and high blood pressure during pregnancy (preeclampsia)	Stroke	Blood clots in the arteries of your arms or legs (peripheral arterial thrombosis)	|Avoid contact sports or other activities that could cause bruising or injury or cause you to fall.	Use a softer toothbrush and waxed floss.	Shave with an electric razor.	Take extra care when using knives, scissors and other sharp tools.	
Antisocial personality disorder|Disregard for right and wrong 	Persistent lying or deceit to exploit others 	Using charm or wit to manipulate others for personal gain or for sheer personal pleasure 	Intense egocentrism, sense of superiority and exhibitionism 	Recurring difficulties with the law 	Repeatedly violating the rights of others by the use of intimidation, dishonesty and misrepresentation 	Child abuse or neglect 	Hostility, significant irritability, agitation, impulsiveness, aggression or violence 	Lack of empathy for others and lack of remorse about harming others 	Unnecessary risk-taking or dangerous behaviors 	Poor or abusive relationships 	Irresponsible work behavior 	Failure to learn from the negative consequences of behavior 	|
Aortic aneurysm|Abdominal aortic aneurysm. An abdominal aortic aneurysm occurs along the part of the aorta that passes through the abdomen. 	Thoracic aortic aneurysm. A thoracic aortic aneurysm occurs along the part of the aorta that passes through the chest cavity. 	|Abdominal aortic aneurysm. An abdominal aortic aneurysm occurs along the part of the aorta that passes through the abdomen. 	Thoracic aortic aneurysm. A thoracic aortic aneurysm occurs along the part of the aorta that passes through the chest cavity. 	
Aortic dissection|Sudden severe chest or upper back pain, often described as a tearing, ripping or shearing sensation, that radiates to the neck or down the back	Loss of consciousness	Shortness of breath	Sudden difficulty speaking, loss of vision, weakness or paralysis of one side of your body, similar to those of a stroke	Weak pulse in one arm compared with the other	|
Aortic valve disease|Aortic valve stenosis. In this condition, the aortic valve opening is narrowed. This narrowing prevents the valve from opening fully, which obstructs blood flow from your heart into your aorta and the rest of your body. 	Aortic valve regurgitation. In this condition, the aortic valve doesn't close properly, causing blood to flow backward into the left ventricle. 	|Aortic valve stenosis. In this condition, the aortic valve opening is narrowed. This narrowing prevents the valve from opening fully, which obstructs blood flow from your heart into your aorta and the rest of your body. 	Aortic valve regurgitation. In this condition, the aortic valve doesn't close properly, causing blood to flow backward into the left ventricle. 	
Aortic valve regurgitation|Fatigue and weakness, especially when you increase your activity level	Shortness of breath with exertion or when you lie down	Swollen ankles and feet (edema)	Chest pain (angina), discomfort or tightness, often increasing during exercise	Lightheadedness or fainting	Irregular pulse (arrhythmia)	Heart murmur	Sensations of a rapid, fluttering heartbeat (palpitations)	|Control high blood pressure. Lowering blood pressure reduces the strain on your aortic root. Cutting back on salt helps you maintain your blood pressure within a normal range.	Eat a heart-healthy diet. Food doesn't directly affect aortic valve regurgitation, but a healthy diet can help prevent other heart disease that can weaken the heart muscle. Eat foods low in saturated and trans fats, sugar, salt and refined grains, such as white bread. Eat a variety of vegetables and fruits, whole grains, and proteins, such as lean meats, fish and nuts.	Maintain a healthy weight. Keep your weight within a range recommended by your doctor.	Exercise. How long and hard you're able to exercise depends on the severity of your condition and the intensity of exercise. Ask your doctor for guidance before starting to exercise, especially if you're considering competitive sports.	See your doctor regularly. Establish a regular evaluation schedule with your cardiologist or primary care provider.	
Aortic valve stenosis|Chest pain (angina) or tightness	Feeling faint or fainting with exertion	Shortness of breath, especially with exertion	Fatigue, especially during times of increased activity	Heart palpitations — sensations of a rapid, fluttering heartbeat 	Heart murmur	|
Aphasia|Speak in short or incomplete sentences	Speak in sentences that don't make sense	Substitute one word for another or one sound for another	Speak unrecognizable words	Not understand other people's conversation	Write sentences that don't make sense	|
Appendicitis|Sudden pain that begins on the right side of the lower abdomen	Sudden pain that begins around your navel and often shifts to your lower right abdomen	Pain that worsens if you cough, walk or make other jarring movements	Nausea and vomiting	Loss of appetite	Low-grade fever that may worsen as the illness progresses	Constipation or diarrhea	Abdominal bloating	|Avoid strenuous activity at first. If your appendectomy was done laparoscopically, limit your activity for three to five days. If you had an open appendectomy, limit your activity for 10 to 14 days. Always ask your doctor about limitations on your activity and when you can resume normal activities following surgery.	Support your abdomen when you cough. Place a pillow over your abdomen and apply pressure before you cough, laugh or move to help reduce pain.	Call your doctor if your pain medications aren't helping. Being in pain puts extra stress on your body and slows the healing process. If you're still in pain despite your pain medications, call your doctor.	Get up and move when you're ready. Start slowly and increase your activity as you feel up to it. Start with short walks.	Sleep when tired. As your body heals, you may find you feel sleepier than usual. Take it easy and rest when you need to.	Discuss returning to work or school with your doctor. You can return to work when you feel up to it. Children may be able to return to school less than a week after surgery. They should wait two to four weeks to resume strenuous activity, such as gym classes or sports.	
Arteriovenous fistula|Purplish, bulging veins that you can see through your skin, similar to varicose veins	Swelling in the arms or legs	Decreased blood pressure	Fatigue	Heart failure	|
Asbestosis|Shortness of breath 	A persistent, dry cough 	Loss of appetite with weight loss 	Fingertips and toes that appear wider and rounder than normal (clubbing) 	Chest tightness or pain 	|Stop smoking. Asbestosis increases the risk of lung cancer. Quitting smoking can reduce this risk. Try to avoid secondhand smoke. Smoking might also cause emphysema, which further reduces your lung reserves.	Get vaccinated. Talk to your doctor about flu and pneumonia vaccines, which can help lower your risk of lung infections. Promptly treat respiratory infections.	
Ascariasis|Persistent cough	Shortness of breath	Wheezing	|
Atrial septal defect|Shortness of breath, especially when exercising	Fatigue	Swelling of legs, feet or abdomen	Heart palpitations or skipped beats	Frequent lung infections	Stroke	Heart murmur, a whooshing sound that can be heard through a stethoscope	|Exercise. Having an atrial septal defect usually doesn't restrict you from activities or exercise. If you have complications, such as arrhythmias, heart failure or pulmonary hypertension, you may not be able to do some activities or exercises. Your cardiologist can help you learn what is safe.	Diet. A heart-healthy diet based on fruits, vegetables and whole grains, and low in saturated fat, cholesterol and sodium, can help you keep your heart healthy. Eating one or two servings of fish a week also is beneficial.	 Preventing infection. Some heart defects and the repair of defects create changes to the surface of the heart in which bacteria can become stuck and grow into an infection (infective endocarditis). Atrial septal defects generally aren't associated with infective endocarditis. But if you have other heart defects in addition to an atrial septal defect, or if you've had atrial septal defect repair within the last six months, you may need to take antibiotics before certain dental or surgical procedures. 	
Aspergillosis|Fever	A cough that may bring up blood or plugs of mucus	Worsening asthma	|
Asthma|Shortness of breath	Chest tightness or pain	Trouble sleeping caused by shortness of breath, coughing or wheezing	A whistling or wheezing sound when exhaling (wheezing is a common sign of asthma in children)	Coughing or wheezing attacks that are worsened by a respiratory virus, such as a cold or the flu	|Use your air conditioner. Air conditioning reduces the amount of airborne pollen from trees, grasses and weeds that finds its way indoors. Air conditioning also lowers indoor humidity and can reduce your exposure to dust mites. If you don't have air conditioning, try to keep your windows closed during pollen season.	Decontaminate your decor. Minimize dust that may worsen nighttime symptoms by replacing certain items in your bedroom. For example, encase pillows, mattresses and box springs in dustproof covers. Remove carpeting and install hardwood or linoleum flooring. Use washable curtains and blinds.	Maintain optimal humidity. If you live in a damp climate, talk to your doctor about using a dehumidifier.	Prevent mold spores. Clean damp areas in the bath, kitchen and around the house to keep mold spores from developing. Get rid of moldy leaves or damp firewood in the yard.	Reduce pet dander. If you're allergic to dander, avoid pets with fur or feathers. Having pets regularly bathed or groomed also may reduce the amount of dander in your surroundings.	Clean regularly. Clean your home at least once a week. If you're likely to stir up dust, wear a mask or have someone else do the cleaning.	Cover your nose and mouth if it's cold out. If your asthma is worsened by cold or dry air, wearing a face mask can help.	
Asthma attack|Severe shortness of breath, chest tightness or pain, and coughing or wheezing	Low peak expiratory flow (PEF) readings, if you use a peak flow meter	Worsening symptoms despite use of a quick-relief (rescue) inhaler	|If your asthma attacks seem to be set off by outside triggers, your doctor can help you learn how to minimize your exposure to them. Allergy tests can help identify your allergic triggers.	Washing your hands frequently can help reduce your risk of catching a cold virus.	If your asthma flares up when you exercise in the cold, it may help to cover your face with a mask or scarf until you get warmed up.	
Astigmatism|Blurred or distorted vision 	Eyestrain 	Headaches 	|
Ataxia|Poor coordination	Unsteady walk and a tendency to stumble	Difficulty with fine motor tasks, such as eating, writing or buttoning a shirt	Change in speech	Involuntary back-and-forth eye movements (nystagmus)	Difficulty swallowing	|
Atelectasis|Difficulty breathing (dyspnea)	Rapid, shallow breathing	Coughing	|
Atopic dermatitis (eczema)|Itching, which may be severe, especially at night	Red to brownish-gray patches, especially on the hands, feet, ankles, wrists, neck, upper chest, eyelids, inside the bend of the elbows and knees, and, in infants, the face and scalp	Small, raised bumps, which may leak fluid and crust over when scratched	Thickened, cracked, dry, scaly skin	Raw, sensitive, swollen skin from scratching	|Take an oral allergy or anti-itch medication. Options include nonprescription allergy medicines (antihistamines) — such as cetirizine (Zyrtec) or fexofenadine (Allegra). Also, diphenhydramine (Benadryl, others) may be helpful if itching is severe. But it can make you drowsy, so it's better for bedtime.	 Take a bleach bath. A diluted-bleach bath decreases bacteria on the skin and related infections. Add 1/2 cup (118 milliliters) of household bleach, not concentrated bleach, to a 40-gallon (151-liter) bathtub filled with warm water — measures are for a U.S.-standard-sized tub filled to the overflow drainage holes. Soak from the neck down or just the affected areas of skin for about 10 minutes. Do not submerge the head. Rinse, pat dry and moisturize. Take a bleach bath no more than two or three times a week. 	Apply an anti-itch cream or calamine lotion to the affected area. A nonprescription hydrocortisone cream, containing at least 1 percent hydrocortisone, can temporarily relieve the itch. Apply it to the affected area before you moisturize. Once your reaction has improved, you may use this type of cream less often to prevent flare-ups.	Moisturize your skin at least twice a day. Use a moisturizer all over while your skin is still damp from a bath or shower. Pay special attention to your legs, arms, back and the sides of your body. If your skin is already dry, consider using oil or lubricating cream.	Avoid scratching. Cover the itchy area if you can't keep from scratching it. Trim nails and wear gloves at night.	Apply cool, wet compresses. Covering the affected area with bandages and dressings helps protect the skin and prevent scratching.	Take a warm bath. Sprinkle the bath water with baking soda, uncooked oatmeal or colloidal oatmeal — a finely ground oatmeal that is made for the bathtub (Aveeno, others). Soak for 10 to 15 minutes, then pat dry and apply medicated lotions, moisturizers or both (use the medicated form first).	Choose mild soaps without dyes or perfumes. Be sure to rinse the soap completely off your body.	Use a humidifier. Hot, dry indoor air can parch sensitive skin and worsen itching and flaking. A portable home humidifier or one attached to your furnace adds moisture to the air inside your home. Keep your humidifier clean to prevent the growth of bacteria and fungi.	Wear cool, smooth-textured cotton clothing. Reduce irritation by avoiding clothing that's rough, tight, scratchy or made from wool. Also, wear appropriate clothing in hot weather or during exercise to prevent excessive sweating.	Treat stress and anxiety. Stress and other emotional disorders can worsen atopic dermatitis. Acknowledging those and trying to improve your emotional health can help.	
Atrioventricular canal defect|Difficulty breathing or rapid breathing	Wheezing	Fatigue	Lack of appetite	Poor weight gain	Pale skin color	Bluish discoloration of the lips and skin	Excessive sweating	Irregular or rapid heartbeat	Swelling in the legs, ankles and feet	|
Atypical depression|Depression that temporarily lifts in response to good news or positive events	Increased appetite that can cause weight gain	Increased desire to sleep, usually more than 10 hours a day	Heavy, leaden feeling in your arms or legs that lasts an hour or more in a day — a feeling that is different from fatigue	Sensitivity to rejection or criticism, which affects your relationships, social life or job	|Stick to your treatment plan. Don't skip psychotherapy sessions or appointments. Even if you're feeling well, don't skip your medications. If you stop, depression symptoms may come back, and you could also experience withdrawal-like symptoms.	Learn about depression. Education about your condition can empower you and motivate you to stick to your treatment plan. Encourage your family members to learn about depression to help them understand and be supportive of you.	Pay attention to warning signs. Work with your doctor or therapist to learn what might trigger your depression symptoms. Make a plan so you know what to do if your symptoms get worse. Contact your doctor or therapist if you notice any changes in symptoms or how you feel. Ask relatives or friends to help watch for warning signs.	Take care of yourself. Eat healthy, be physically active and get plenty of sleep. Consider walking, jogging, swimming, gardening or another activity that you enjoy. Sleeping well is important for both your physical and mental well-being. If you're having trouble sleeping, talk to your doctor about what you can do.	Avoid alcohol and recreational drugs. It may seem like alcohol or drugs lessen depression symptoms, but in the long run they generally worsen symptoms and make depression harder to treat. Talk with your doctor or therapist if you need help with this issue.	
Autism spectrum disorder|Fails to respond to his or her name or appears not to hear you at times	Resists cuddling and holding and seems to prefer playing alone — retreats into his or her own world	Has poor eye contact and lacks facial expression	Doesn't speak or has delayed speech, or may lose previous ability to say words or sentences	Can't start a conversation or keep one going, or may only start a conversation to make requests or label items	Speaks with an abnormal tone or rhythm — may use a singsong voice or robot-like speech	May repeat words or phrases verbatim, but doesn't understand how to use them	Doesn't appear to understand simple questions or directions	Doesn't express emotions or feelings and appears unaware of others' feelings	Doesn't point at or bring objects to share interest	Inappropriately approaches a social interaction by being passive, aggressive or disruptive	|
Autoimmune pancreatitis|Dark urine	Pale stools or stools that float in the toilet	Yellow skin and eyes (jaundice)	Pain in your upper abdomen or middle part of your back	Nausea and vomiting	Weakness or extreme tiredness	Loss of appetite or feelings of fullness	Weight loss for no known reason	|
Autonomic neuropathy|Dizziness and fainting when standing caused by a sudden drop in blood pressure.	Urinary problems, such as difficulty starting urination, incontinence, difficulty sensing a full bladder and inability to completely empty the bladder, which can lead to urinary tract infections.	Sexual difficulties, including problems achieving or maintaining an erection (erectile dysfunction) or ejaculation problems in men and vaginal dryness, low libido and difficulty reaching orgasm in women.	Difficulty digesting food, such as feeling full after a few bites of food, loss of appetite, diarrhea, constipation, abdominal bloating, nausea, vomiting, difficulty swallowing and heartburn, all due to changes in digestive function.	Sweating abnormalities, such as sweating too much or too little, which affects the ability to regulate body temperature.	Sluggish pupil reaction, making it difficult to adjust from light to dark and seeing well when driving at night.	Exercise intolerance, which may occur if your heart rate stays the same instead of adjusting in response to your activity level.	| Posture changes. Stand up slowly, in stages, to decrease dizziness. Sit with your legs dangling over the side of the bed for a few minutes before getting out of bed. Flex your feet and grip your hands for a few seconds before standing up, to increase blood flow. Once standing, try tensing your leg muscles while crossing one leg over the other a few times to increase blood pressure. 	Elevate the bed. If you have low blood pressure, it may also help to raise the head of your bed by about 4 inches by placing blocks or risers under the legs at the head of the bed.	Digestion. Eat small, frequent meals to combat digestive problems. Increase fluids, and opt for low-fat, high-fiber foods, which may improve digestion. You may also want to try restricting foods that contain lactose and gluten.	Diabetes management. Try to keep your blood sugar as close to normal as possible. Tight blood sugar control can help lessen symptoms and help to prevent or delay the onset of new problems.	
Baby acne||Keep your baby's face clean. Wash your baby's face daily with warm water and mild baby soap.	Dry your baby's face gently. Simply pat your baby's skin dry.	Don't pinch or scrub the acne. You may cause more irritation or an infection.	Avoid using lotions or oils on your baby's face.	
Back pain|Muscle ache	Shooting or stabbing pain	Pain that radiates down your leg	Limited flexibility or range of motion of the back	|
Bacterial vaginosis|Vaginal discharge that's thin and grayish white	Foul-smelling "fishy" vaginal odor, especially after sexual intercourse	Vaginal itching	Burning during urination	|
Bad breath||Brush your teeth after you eat. Keep a toothbrush at work to use after eating. Brush using a fluoride-containing toothpaste at least twice a day, especially after meals. Toothpaste with antibacterial properties has been shown to reduce bad breath odors. 	Floss at least once a day. Proper flossing removes food particles and plaque from between your teeth, helping to control bad breath. 	Brush your tongue. Your tongue harbors bacteria, so carefully brushing it may help reduce odors. People who have a coated tongue from a significant overgrowth of bacteria (from smoking or dry mouth, for example) may benefit from using a tongue scraper. Or use a toothbrush that has a built-in tongue cleaner. 	Clean your dentures or dental appliances. If you wear a bridge or a partial or complete denture, clean it thoroughly at least once a day or as directed by your dentist. If you have a dental retainer or mouth guard, clean it each time before you put it in your mouth. Your dentist can recommend the best cleaning product. 	Avoid dry mouth. To keep your mouth moist, avoid tobacco and drink plenty of water — not coffee, soft drinks or alcohol, which can lead to a drier mouth. Chew gum or suck on candy — preferably sugarless — to stimulate saliva. If you have chronic dry mouth, your dentist or physician may prescribe an artificial saliva preparation or an oral medication that stimulates the flow of saliva. 	Adjust your diet. Avoid food and beverages that can cause bad breath. Avoid sticky, sugary foods. 	Regularly get a new toothbrush. Change your toothbrush when it becomes frayed, about every three to four months, and choose a soft-bristled toothbrush. 	Schedule regular dental checkups. See your dentist on a regular basis — generally once or twice a year — to have your teeth or dentures examined and cleaned. 	
Bags under eyes|Mild swelling	Saggy or loose skin	Dark circles	|Use a cool compress. Wet a clean washcloth with cool water. While sitting up, apply the damp washcloth to the skin under and around your eyes for a few minutes using mild pressure.	Get enough sleep at night. For most adults, seven to eight hours a night is a good amount of sleep.	Sleep with your head slightly raised. Add an extra pillow or prop up the head of your mattress. Or elevate the entire head of the bed a few inches. This helps prevent fluids from accumulating around your eyes as you sleep.	Reduce allergy symptoms. Avoid allergens when possible. Try over-the-counter allergy medications. Talk to your doctor about prevention strategies if you develop under-eye reactions due to hair dyes, soaps, cosmetics or other allergens.	
Baker's cyst|Swelling behind your knee, and sometimes in your leg	Knee pain	Stiffness and inability to fully flex the knee	|Follow the R.I.C.E. principles. These letters stand for rest, ice, compression and elevation. Rest your leg. Ice your knee. Compress your knee with a wrap, sleeve or brace. And elevate your leg when possible, especially at night.	Try over-the-counter pain-relieving medications. Drugs such as ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin IB, others), naproxen sodium (Aleve, others), acetaminophen (Tylenol, others) and aspirin can help relieve pain. Follow the dosing instructions on the package. Don't take more than the recommend dosage.	Reduce your physical activity. Doing so will reduce irritation of your knee joint. Your doctor can offer you guidance on how long you need to reduce your activity levels, and he or she may be able to suggest alternative forms of exercise you can do in the meantime.	
Barrett's esophagus|Frequent heartburn	Difficulty swallowing food	Less commonly, chest pain	|Maintaining a healthy weight.	Avoiding tightfitting clothes, which can put pressure on your abdomen and aggravate reflux.	Eliminating foods and drinks that trigger your heartburn.	Stopping smoking.	Avoiding stooping or bending, especially soon after eating.	Avoiding lying down after eating. Wait at least three hours after eating to lie down or go to bed.	Raising the head of your bed. Place wooden blocks under your bed to elevate your head. Aim for an elevation of 6 to 8 inches. Raising your head by using only pillows isn't a good alternative.	
Bartholin's cyst|A tender, painful lump near the vaginal opening	Discomfort while walking or sitting	Pain during intercourse	Fever	|Treatments and drugs	Prevention	
Basal cell carcinoma|A pearly white or waxy bump, often with visible blood vessels, on your face, ears or neck. The bump may bleed and develop a crust. In darker skinned people, this type of cancer may be brown or black.	A flat, scaly, brown or flesh-colored patch on your back or chest. Over time, these patches can grow quite large.	More rarely, a white, waxy scar. This type of basal cell carcinoma is easy to overlook, but it may be a sign of a particularly invasive and disfiguring cancer called morpheaform basal cell carcinoma.	|
Body dysmorphic disorder|Preoccupation with your physical appearance with extreme self-consciousness 	Frequent examination of yourself in the mirror, or the opposite, avoidance of mirrors altogether 	Strong belief that you have an abnormality or defect in your appearance that makes you ugly 	Belief that others take special notice of your appearance in a negative way 	Avoidance of social situations 	Feeling the need to stay housebound 	The need to seek reassurance about your appearance from others 	Frequent cosmetic procedures with little satisfaction 	Excessive grooming, such as hair plucking or skin picking, or excessive exercise in an unsuccessful effort to improve the flaw 	The need to grow a beard or wear excessive makeup or clothing to camouflage perceived flaws 	Comparison of your appearance with that of others 	Reluctance to appear in pictures 	|Stick to your treatment plan. Don't skip therapy sessions, even if you don't feel like going. 	Take your medications as directed. Even if you're feeling well, resist any temptation to skip your medications. If you stop, symptoms may come back. You could also experience withdrawal-like symptoms from stopping a medication too suddenly. 	Learn about your condition. Education about body dysmorphic disorder can empower you and motivate you to stick to your treatment plan. 	Pay attention to warning signs. Work with your doctor or therapist to learn what might trigger your symptoms. Make a plan so you know what to do if symptoms return. Contact your doctor or therapist if you notice any changes in symptoms or how you feel. 	Get active. Physical activity and exercise can help manage many symptoms, such as depression, stress and anxiety. Physical activity can also counteract the effects of some psychiatric medications that may cause weight gain. Consider walking, jogging, swimming, gardening or taking up another form of physical activity you enjoy. 	Avoid drugs and alcohol. Alcohol and illegal drugs can worsen mental illness symptoms or interact with medications. 	Get routine medical care. Don't neglect checkups or skip visits to your family doctor, especially if you aren't feeling well. You may have a new health problem that needs to be addressed, or you may be experiencing side effects of medication. 	
Bed-wetting|Your child still wets the bed after age 7	Your child starts to wet the bed after a few months or more of being dry at night	Bed-wetting is accompanied by painful urination, unusual thirst, pink or red urine, hard stools, or snoring	|Limit how much your child drinks in the evening. It's important to get enough fluids, so there's no need to limit how much your child drinks in a day. However, encourage your child to focus on drinking liquids in the morning and early afternoon, which may reduce thirst in the evening. But don't limit evening fluids if your child participates in sports practice or games in the evenings.	Avoid beverages and foods with caffeine. Beverages with caffeine are discouraged for children at any time of day. Because caffeine may stimulate the bladder, it's especially discouraged in the evening.	Encourage double voiding before bed. Double voiding is urinating at the beginning of the bedtime routine and then again just before falling asleep. Remind your child that it's OK to use the toilet during the night if needed. Use small night lights, so your child can easily find the way between the bedroom and bathroom.	Encourage regular toilet use throughout the day. During the day and evening, suggest that your child urinate every two hours or so, or at least often enough to avoid a feeling of urgency.	Treat constipation. If constipation is a problem for your child, your doctor may recommend a stool softener.	Prevent rashes. To prevent a rash caused by wet underpants, help your child rinse his or her bottom and genital area every morning. It also may help to cover the affected area with a protective moisture barrier ointment or cream at bedtime. Ask your pediatrician for product recommendations.	
Bedbugs|Red, often with a darker red spot in the middle	Itchy	Arranged in a rough line or in a cluster	Located on the face, neck, arms and hands	|
Bedsores (pressure sores)|The skin is not broken.	The skin appears red on people with lighter skin color, and the skin doesn't briefly lighten (blanch) when touched.	On people with darker skin, the skin may show discoloration, and it doesn't blanch when touched.	The site may be tender, painful, firm, soft, warm or cool compared with the surrounding skin.	|
Bee stings|Instant, sharp burning pain at the sting site 	A red welt at the sting area 	A small, white spot where the stinger punctured the skin 	Slight swelling around the sting area 	|Treatments and drugs	Prevention	
Bell's palsy|Rapid onset of mild weakness to total paralysis on one side of your face — occurring within hours to days	Facial droop and difficulty making facial expressions, such as closing your eye or smiling	Drooling	Pain around the jaw or in or behind your ear on the affected side	Increased sensitivity to sound on the affected side	Headache	A decrease in your ability to taste	Changes in the amount of tears and saliva you produce	|Protecting the eye you can't close. Using lubricating eyedrops during the day and an eye ointment at night will help keep your eye moist. Wearing glasses or goggles during the day and an eye patch at night can protect your eye from getting poked or scratched.	Taking over-the-counter pain relievers. Aspirin, ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin IB, others) or acetaminophen (Tylenol, others) may help ease your pain.	Applying moist heat. Putting a washcloth soaked in warm water on your face several times a day may help relieve pain.	Doing your physical therapy exercises. Massaging and exercising your face according to your physical therapist's advice may help relax your facial muscles.	
Benign paroxysmal positional vertigo (BPPV)|Dizziness	A sense that you or your surroundings are spinning or moving (vertigo)	A loss of balance or unsteadiness	Nausea	Vomiting	|Be aware of the possibility of losing your balance, which can lead to falling and serious injury.	Sit down immediately when you feel dizzy.	Use good lighting if you get up at night.	Walk with a cane for stability if you're at risk of falling.	Work closely with your doctor to manage your symptoms effectively.	
Benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH)|Frequent or urgent need to urinate	Increased frequency of urination at night (nocturia)	Difficulty starting urination	Weak urine stream or a stream that stops and starts	Dribbling at the end of urination	Straining while urinating	Inability to completely empty the bladder	|Limit beverages in the evening. Don't drink anything for an hour or two before bedtime to avoid middle-of-the-night trips to the toilet.	Limit caffeine and alcohol. They can increase urine production, irritate the bladder and worsen symptoms.	Limit decongestants or antihistamines. These drugs tighten the band of muscles around the urethra that control urine flow, making it harder to urinate.	Go when you first feel the urge. Waiting too long might overstretch the bladder muscle and cause damage.	Schedule bathroom visits. Try to urinate at regular times — such as every four to six hours during the day — to "retrain" the bladder. This can be especially useful if you have severe frequency and urgency.	Follow a healthy diet. Obesity is associated with enlarged prostate.	Stay active. Inactivity contributes to urine retention. Even a small amount of exercise can help reduce urinary problems caused by an enlarged prostate.	Urinate — and then urinate again a few moments later. This practice is known as double voiding.	Keep warm. Colder temperatures can cause urine retention and increase the urgency to urinate.	
Bile reflux|Upper abdominal pain that may be severe	Frequent heartburn — a burning sensation in your chest that sometimes spreads to your throat, along with a sour taste in your mouth	Nausea	Vomiting a greenish-yellow fluid (bile)	Occasionally, a cough or hoarseness	Unintended weight loss	|Stop smoking. Smoking increases the production of stomach acid and dries up saliva, which helps protect the esophagus.	Eat smaller meals. Eating smaller, more-frequent meals reduces pressure on the lower esophageal sphincter, helping to prevent the valve from opening at the wrong time.	Stay upright after eating. After a meal, waiting two to three hours before lying down allows time for your stomach to empty.	Limit fatty foods. High-fat meals relax the lower esophageal sphincter and slow the rate at which food leaves your stomach.	Avoid problem foods and beverages. Some foods increase the production of stomach acid and may relax the lower esophageal sphincter. Among the foods with this effect are caffeinated and carbonated drinks, chocolate, citrus foods and juices, vinegar-based dressings, onions, tomato-based foods, spicy foods and mint.	Limit or avoid alcohol. Drinking alcohol relaxes the lower esophageal sphincter and irritates the esophagus.	Lose excess weight. Heartburn and acid reflux are more likely to occur when excess weight puts added pressure on your stomach.	Raise your bed. Sleeping with your upper body raised 4 to 6 inches (10 to 15 centimeters) may help prevent reflux symptoms. Raising the head of your bed with blocks or sleeping on a foam wedge is more effective than is using extra pillows.	Relax. When you're under stress, digestion slows, possibly worsening reflux symptoms. Relaxation techniques, such as deep breathing, meditation or yoga, may help.	
Bipolar disorder|Bipolar I disorder. You've had at least one manic episode. The manic episode may be preceded by or followed by hypomanic or major depressive episodes. Mania symptoms cause significant impairment in your life and may require hospitalization or trigger a break from reality (psychosis).	Bipolar II disorder. You've had at least one major depressive episode lasting at least two weeks and at least one hypomanic episode lasting at least four days, but you've never had a manic episode. Major depressive episodes or the unpredictable changes in mood and behavior can cause distress or difficulty in areas of your life. 	Cyclothymic disorder. You've had at least two years — or one year in children and teenagers — of numerous periods of hypomania symptoms (less severe than a hypomanic episode) and periods of depressive symptoms (less severe than a major depressive episode). During that time, symptoms occur at least half the time and never go away for more than two months. Symptoms cause significant distress in important areas of your life.	Other types. These include, for example, bipolar and related disorder due to another medical condition, such as Cushing's disease, multiple sclerosis or stroke. Another type is called substance and medication-induced bipolar and related disorder.	|Quit drinking or using illegal drugs. One of the biggest concerns with bipolar disorder is the negative consequences of risk-taking behavior and drug or alcohol abuse. Get help if you have trouble quitting on your own.	Steer clear of unhealthy relationships. Surround yourself with people who are a positive influence and won't encourage unhealthy behavior or attitudes that can worsen your bipolar disorder.	Get regular physical activity and exercise. Moderate, regular physical activity and exercise can help steady your mood. Working out releases brain chemicals that make you feel good (endorphins), can help you sleep and has a number of other benefits. Check with your doctor before starting any exercise program, especially if you're taking lithium, to make sure exercise won't interfere with your medication.	 Get plenty of sleep. Don't stay up all night. Instead, get plenty of sleep. Sleeping enough is an important part of managing your mood. If you have trouble sleeping, talk to your doctor or mental health provider about what you can do.	
Bird flu (avian influenza)|Cough	Fever	Sore throat	Muscle aches	Headache	Shortness of breath	|
Black hairy tongue|Black discoloration of the tongue, although the color may be brown, tan, green, yellow or white	A hairy or furry appearance of the tongue	Altered taste or metallic taste in mouth	Bad breath (halitosis)	Gagging or tickling sensation, if the overgrowth of the papillae is excessive	|Brush your tongue. Give your tongue a gentle brushing whenever you brush your teeth to remove dead cells, bacteria and food debris. Use a soft-bristled toothbrush or a flexible tongue scraper.	Brush after eating or drinking. Brush your teeth at least twice a day and ideally after every meal, using fluoride toothpaste. If you can't brush after eating, at least try to rinse your mouth with water.	Floss at least once a day. Proper flossing removes food particles and plaque from between your teeth.	Visit your dentist regularly. Get professional teeth cleanings and regular oral exams, which can help your dentist prevent problems or spot them early. Your dentist can recommend a schedule for you.	
Bladder stones|Lower abdominal pain 	In men, pain or discomfort in the penis 	Painful urination 	Frequent urination 	Difficulty urinating or interruption of urine flow 	Blood in your urine 	Cloudy or abnormally dark-colored urine 	|
Bladder cancer|Blood in urine (hematuria) — urine may appear bright red or cola colored. Or urine may appear normal, but blood may be detected in a microscopic examination of the urine.	Frequent urination.	Painful urination.	Back pain.	Pelvic pain.	|
Blepharitis|Watery eyes	Red eyes	A gritty, burning or stinging sensation in the eyes	Eyelids that appear greasy	Itchy eyelids	Red, swollen eyelids	Flaking of the skin around the eyes	Crusted eyelashes upon awakening	Eyelid sticking	More frequent blinking	Sensitivity to light	Eyelashes that grow abnormally (misdirected eyelashes)	Loss of eyelashes	|Apply a warm compress over your closed eye for several minutes to loosen the crusty deposits on your eyelids.	Immediately afterward, use a washcloth moistened with warm water and a few drops of diluted baby shampoo to wash away any oily debris or scales at the base of your eyelashes. Use a different clean cloth for each eye.	In some cases, you may need to be more deliberate about cleaning the edge of your eyelids where your eyelashes are located. To do this, gently pull your eyelid away from your eye and use the washcloth to gently rub the base of the lashes. This helps avoid damaging your cornea with the washcloth. Ask your doctor whether you should use a topical antibiotic ointment after cleaning your eyelids in this way.	Rinse your eyelids with warm water and gently pat it dry with a clean, dry towel.	
Blind loop syndrome|Loss of appetite	Abdominal pain	Nausea	Bloating	An uncomfortable feeling of fullness after eating	Diarrhea	Unintentional weight loss	|
Boils and carbuncles|A painful, red bump that starts out about the size of a pea 	Red, swollen skin around the bump 	An increase in the size of the bump over a few days as it fills with pus (can sometimes reach the size of a baseball) 	Development of a yellow-white tip that eventually ruptures and allows the pus to drain out 	|Warm compresses. Apply a warm washcloth or compress to the affected area several times a day. This helps the boil rupture and drain more quickly. 	Never squeeze or lance a boil yourself. This can spread the infection. 	Prevent contamination. Wash your hands thoroughly after treating a boil. Also, launder clothing, towels or compresses that have touched the infected area, especially if you have recurrent boils or carbuncles. 	
Bone metastasis|Bone pain	Broken bones	Urinary incontinence	Bowel incontinence	Weakness in the legs or arms	High levels of calcium in the blood (hypercalcemia), which can cause nausea, vomiting, constipation and confusion	|
Bone spurs|Knee. Bone spurs in your knee may make it painful to extend and bend your leg. The bony growths can get in the way of bones and tendons that keep your knee operating smoothly.	Spine. Bone spurs on your vertebrae can narrow the space that contains your spinal cord. These bone spurs can pinch the spinal cord or its nerve roots and can cause weakness or numbness in your arms or legs.	Hip. Bone spurs can make it painful to move your hip, although you might feel the pain in your knee. Depending on their placement, bone spurs can reduce the range of motion in your hip joint.	Shoulder. Bone spurs can rub on your rotator cuff, a group of muscles and tendons that help control your shoulder movements. This can cause swelling (tendinitis) and tears in your rotator cuff.	Fingers. Appearing as hard lumps under your skin, bone spurs can make the joints in your fingers look knobby.	|
Borderline personality disorder|An intense fear of abandonment, even going to extreme measures to avoid real or imagined separation or rejection	A pattern of unstable intense relationships, such as idealizing someone one moment and then suddenly believing the person doesn't care enough or is cruel	Rapid changes in self-identity and self-image that include shifting goals and values, and seeing yourself as bad or as if you don't exist at all	Periods of stress-related paranoia and loss of contact with reality, lasting from a few minutes to a few hours	Impulsive and risky behavior, such as gambling, reckless driving, unsafe sex, spending sprees, binge eating or drug abuse, or sabotaging success by suddenly quitting a good job or ending a positive relationship	Suicidal threats or behavior or self-injury, often in response to fear of separation or rejection	Wide mood swings lasting from a few hours to a few days, which can include intense happiness, irritability, shame or anxiety	Ongoing feelings of emptiness	Inappropriate, intense anger, such as frequently losing your temper, being sarcastic or bitter, or having physical fights	|
Botulism|Difficulty swallowing or speaking	Dry mouth	Facial weakness on both sides of the face	Blurred or double vision	Drooping eyelids	Trouble breathing	Nausea, vomiting and abdominal cramps	Paralysis	|Foodborne botulism. The harmful bacteria thrive and produce the toxin in environments with little oxygen, such as in canned food.	Wound botulism. If these bacteria get into a cut, they can cause a dangerous infection that produces the toxin.	Infant botulism. This most common form of botulism begins after Clostridium botulinum bacterial spores grow in a baby's intestinal tract. It typically occurs between the ages of 2 months and 8 months.	
Bradycardia|Near-fainting or fainting (syncope)	Dizziness	Weakness	Fatigue	Shortness of breath	Chest pains	Confusion or memory problems	Easily tiring during physical activity	|
Brain aneurysm|Sudden, extremely severe headache	Nausea and vomiting	Stiff neck	Blurred or double vision	Sensitivity to light	Seizure	A drooping eyelid	Loss of consciousness	Confusion	|Don't smoke or use recreational drugs. If you smoke or use recreational drugs, talk to your doctor about strategies or an appropriate treatment program to help you quit.	Eat a healthy diet and exercise. Changes in diet and exercise can help lower blood pressure. Talk to your doctor about changes appropriate for you.	Limit caffeine. Caffeine is a stimulant that can cause a sudden increase in blood pressure.	Avoid straining. Sudden, forceful and sustained exertion of the type you expend when you lift heavy weights can cause a sudden increase in blood pressure.	
Breast cancer|A breast lump or thickening that feels different from the surrounding tissue	Bloody discharge from the nipple	Change in the size, shape or appearance of a breast	Changes to the skin over the breast, such as dimpling	A newly inverted nipple	Peeling, scaling or flaking of the pigmented area of skin surrounding the nipple (areola) or breast skin	Redness or pitting of the skin over your breast, like the skin of an orange	|
Breast cysts|A smooth, easily movable round or oval lump with distinct edges (which typically, though not always, indicates it's benign)	Nipple discharge that may be clear, yellow, straw colored or dark brown 	Breast pain or tenderness in the area of the breast lump	Increase in breast lump size and breast tenderness just before your period	Decrease in breast lump size and resolution of other symptoms after your period	|Wear a well-fitted, supportive bra. If your breast cysts are painful, supporting your breasts may help relieve some discomfort.	Apply a compress. If cysts are painful, either a warm or cool compress can offer relief. Applying an ice pack can also relieve pain.	Avoid caffeine. There's no evidence linking caffeine and breast cysts. However, some women find symptom relief after eliminating caffeine from their diets. Consider reducing or eliminating caffeine — in beverages, as well as in foods such as chocolate — to see if your symptoms improve.	Reduce salt in your diet. Although studies on salt restriction and cyst formation aren't conclusive, some experts suggest that reducing salt in your diet may help. Consuming less sodium reduces the amount of excess fluid retained by your body, which in turn may help relieve symptoms associated with a fluid-filled breast cyst.	Consider trying over-the-counter pain medications if your doctor recommends them. Some types of breast pain may be eased by the use of acetaminophen (Tylenol, others) or nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, such as ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin IB, others) or naproxen (Aleve, Naprosyn, others).	
Broken ankle/broken foot|Immediate, throbbing pain	Pain that increases with activity and decreases with rest	Swelling	Bruising	Tenderness	Deformity	Difficulty in walking or bearing weight	Problems getting a shoe on or off	|
Broken arm|Severe pain, which may increase with movement	Swelling	Bruising	Deformity, such as a bent arm or wrist	Inability to turn your arm from palm up to palm down or vice versa	|
Broken collarbone|Pain that increases with shoulder movement	Swelling	Tenderness	Bruising	A bulge on or near your shoulder	A grinding or crackling sound when you try to move your shoulder	Stiffness or inability to move your shoulder	Newborn children will often not move their arm for several days following a birth-related collarbone fracture.	|Treatments and drugs	
Broken wrist/broken hand|Severe pain that tends to increase during gripping or squeezing	Swelling	Tenderness	Bruising	Obvious deformity, such as a bent wrist or crooked finger	Stiffness or inability to move your fingers or thumb	Numbness in your hand	|
Broken heart syndrome|Chest pain	Shortness of breath	|
Broken leg|Severe pain, which may worsen with movement	Swelling	Tenderness	Bruising	Obvious deformity or shortening of the affected leg	Inability to walk	|
Broken nose|Pain or tenderness, especially when touching your nose	Swelling of your nose and surrounding areas	Bleeding from your nose	Bruising around your nose or eyes	Crooked or misshapen nose	Difficulty breathing through your nose	Discharge of mucus from your nose	Feeling that one or both of your nasal passages are blocked	|Act quickly. When the break first occurs, breathe through your mouth and lean forward to reduce the amount of blood that drains into your throat.	Use ice. Apply ice packs or cold compresses immediately after the injury, and then at least four times a day for the first 24 to 48 hours to reduce swelling. Keep the ice or cold compress on for 10 to 15 minutes at a time. Wrap the ice in a washcloth to prevent frostbite. Try not to apply too much pressure, which can cause additional pain or damage to your nose.	Relieve pain. Take over-the-counter pain relievers, such as acetaminophen (Tylenol, others), ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin IB, others) or naproxen sodium (Aleve, others), as necessary.	Keep your head up. Elevate your head — especially when sleeping — so as not to worsen swelling and throbbing.	Limit your activities. For the first two weeks after treatment, don't play any sports. Avoid contact sports for at least six weeks after your injury.	
Broken toe|Pain	Swelling	Discoloration	|Treatments and drugs	
Bronchiolitis|Runny nose 	Stuffy nose 	Cough 	Slight fever (not always present) 	|Humidify the air. If the air in your child's room is dry, a cool-mist humidifier or vaporizer can moisten the air and help ease congestion and coughing. Be sure to keep the humidifier clean to prevent the growth of bacteria and molds. Keep the room warm but not overheated — too much heat can make the air drier. Another way to humidify the air is to run a hot shower or bath in the bathroom and let it steam up the room. Sitting in the room holding your child for about 15 minutes may help ease a fit of coughing. 	Keep your child upright. Being in an upright position usually makes breathing easier. Placing your infant in a car seat may help. If you plan to leave your child in a car seat for an extended period of time, such as for a nap, make sure your child's head won't fall forward, which can prevent proper breathing. To do this, place foam wedges or a rolled up blanket on each side of your child's head to keep it safely in place. Also check that the seat has an appropriate slope. This varies with the child's size and age. 	Have your child drink clear fluids. To prevent dehydration, give your child plenty of clear fluids to drink, such as water, juice or gelatin water. Your child may drink more slowly than usual, due to congestion. 	Try saline nose drops to ease congestion. You can purchase these drops over-the-counter (OTC). They're effective, safe and nonirritating, even for children. To use them, instill several drops into one nostril, then immediately bulb suction that nostril (but don't push the bulb too far in). Repeat the process in the other nostril. If your child is old enough, you might teach your child how to blow his or her nose. 	Use OTC pain relievers. OTC pain relievers such as acetaminophen (Tylenol, others) may help relieve a sore throat and improve your child's ability to drink fluids. Don't give acetaminophen to children under 3 months of age. And never give your child aspirin. It's associated with a rare but serious illness called Reye's syndrome. OTC cold preparations aren't appropriate for bronchiolitis, either. 	Maintain a smoke-free environment. Smoke can aggravate symptoms of respiratory infections. If a family member smokes, ask him or her to smoke outside of the house and outside of the car. 	
Bronchitis|Cough	Production of mucus (sputum), which can be clear, white, yellowish-gray or green in color — rarely, it may be streaked with blood	Fatigue	Shortness of breath	Slight fever and chills	Chest discomfort	|Avoid lung irritants. Don't smoke. Wear a mask when the air is polluted or if you're exposed to irritants, such as paint or household cleaners with strong fumes.	Use a humidifier. Warm, moist air helps relieve coughs and loosens mucus in your airways. But be sure to clean the humidifier according to the manufacturer's recommendations to avoid the growth of bacteria and fungi in the water container.	Consider a face mask outside. If cold air aggravates your cough and causes shortness of breath, put on a cold-air face mask before you go outside.	
Brucellosis|Fever	Chills	Sweats	Weakness	Fatigue	Joint, muscle and back pain	Headache	|
Brugada syndrome|Fainting (syncope)	Irregular heartbeats or palpitations	Extremely fast and chaotic heartbeat (sudden cardiac arrest)	|
Bruxism (teeth grinding)|Teeth grinding or clenching, which may be loud enough to awaken your sleep partner	Teeth that are flattened, fractured, chipped or loose	Worn tooth enamel, exposing deeper layers of your tooth	Increased tooth sensitivity	Jaw or face pain or soreness	Tired or tight jaw muscles	Pain that feels like an earache, though it's actually not a problem with your ear	Dull headache originating in the temples	Damage from chewing on the inside of your cheek	Indentations on your tongue	|Reduce stress. Listening to music, taking a warm bath or exercising can help you relax and may reduce your risk of developing bruxism.	Avoid stimulating substances in the evening. Don't drink caffeinated coffee or caffeinated tea after dinner, and avoid alcohol and smoking during the evening, as they may worsen bruxism.	Practice good sleep habits. Getting a good night's sleep, which may include treatment for sleep problems, may help reduce bruxism.	Talk to your sleep partner. If you have a sleeping partner, ask him or her to be aware of any grinding or clicking sounds that you might make while sleeping so that you can report this to your doctor.	Schedule regular dental exams. Dental exams are the best way to identify bruxism. Your dentist can spot signs of bruxism in your mouth and jaw with regular visits and exams.	
Bundle branch block|Fainting (syncope)	Feeling as if you're going to faint (presyncope)	|
Bunions|A bulging bump on the outside of the base of your big toe	Swelling, redness or soreness around your big toe joint	Thickening of the skin at the base of your big toe	Corns or calluses — these often develop where the first and second toes overlap	Persistent or intermittent pain	Restricted movement of your big toe	|Apply a nonmedicated bunion pad to the bony bump.	Apply an ice pack two to three times daily to help reduce swelling if a bunion becomes inflamed or painful.	Wear shoes with a wide, deep toe box.	Avoid shoes with heels higher than 2 1/4 inches (5.7 centimeters).	
Burns|First-degree burn. This minor burn affects only the outer layer of the skin (epidermis). It may cause redness, swelling and pain. It usually heals with first-aid measures within several days to a week. Sunburn is a classic example.	Second-degree burn. This type of burn affects both the epidermis and the second layer of skin (dermis). It may cause red, white or splotchy skin, pain, and swelling. And the wound often looks wet or moist. Blisters may develop, and pain can be severe. Deep second-degree burns can cause scarring.	Third-degree burn. This burn reaches into the fat layer beneath the skin. Burned areas may be charred black or white. The skin may look waxy or leathery. Third-degree burns can destroy nerves, causing numbness. A person with this type of burn may also have difficulty breathing or experience smoke inhalation or carbon monoxide poisoning.	|Cool the burn. Run cool (not cold) tap water over the burn for 10 to 15 minutes or until the pain eases. Or apply a clean towel dampened with cool tap water. Don't use ice. Putting ice directly on a burn can cause further damage to the tissue.	Remove rings or other tight items from the burned area. Try to do this quickly and gently, before the area swells.	Don't break small blisters (no bigger than your little fingernail). If blisters break, gently clean the area with mild soap and water, apply an antibiotic ointment, and cover it with a nonstick gauze bandage.	Apply moisturizer or aloe vera lotion or gel. This may soothe the area and prevent dryness as the wound heals.	If needed, take an over-the-counter pain reliever. Nonprescription products include ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin IB, others), naproxen (Aleve) and acetaminophen (Tylenol, others).	Consider a tetanus shot. Make sure that your tetanus booster is up to date. Doctors recommend people get a tetanus shot at least every 10 years.	
Bursitis|Feel achy or stiff	Hurt more when you move it or press on it	Look swollen and red	|Rest and immobilize the affected area	Apply ice to reduce swelling	Take an over-the-counter medication, such as ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin IB, others) or naproxen sodium (Aleve, others), to relieve pain and reduce inflammation	Cushion your knees if you sleep on your side by placing a small pillow between your legs	Avoid elbow pressure by not leaning or placing your weight on your elbows to rise from a lying position	
C. difficile|Watery diarrhea three or more times a day for two or more days	Mild abdominal cramping and tenderness	|Plenty of fluids. Choose fluids containing water, salt and sugar, such as diluted fruit juice, soft drinks and broths.	Good nutrition. If you have watery diarrhea, eat starchy foods, such as potatoes, noodles, rice, wheat and oatmeal. Other good choices are saltine crackers, bananas, soup and boiled vegetables. If you aren't hungry, you may need a liquid diet at first. After your diarrhea clears up, you may have temporary difficulty digesting milk and milk-based products.	
Corns and calluses|A thick, rough area of skin	A hardened, raised bump	Tenderness or pain under your skin	Flaky, dry or waxy skin	|Use over-the-counter pads. Apply a pad to protect the area where a corn or callus developed. Be careful using over-the-counter (nonprescription) liquid corn removers or medicated corn pads. These contain salicylic acid, which can irritate healthy skin and lead to infection, especially in people with diabetes or other conditions that cause poor blood flow.	Soak your hands or feet. Soaking your hands or feet in warm, soapy water softens corns and calluses. This can make it easier to remove the thickened skin.	Thin thickened skin. During or after bathing, rub a corn or callus with a pumice stone, nail file, emery board or washcloth to help remove a layer of toughened skin. Don't use a sharp object to trim the skin. Don't use a pumice stone if you have diabetes because your risk of infection is higher.	Moisturize your skin. Apply moisturizer to your hands and feet to help keep the skin soft.	Wear comfortable shoes and socks. Stick to well-fitting, cushioned shoes and socks until your corn or callus disappears.	
Cancer|Fatigue	Lump or area of thickening that can be felt under the skin	Weight changes, including unintended loss or gain	Skin changes, such as yellowing, darkening or redness of the skin, sores that won't heal, or changes to existing moles	Changes in bowel or bladder habits	Persistent cough or trouble breathing	Difficulty swallowing	Hoarseness	Persistent indigestion or discomfort after eating	Persistent, unexplained muscle or joint pain	Persistent, unexplained fevers or night sweats	Unexplained bleeding or bruising	|
Cervical cancer|Vaginal bleeding after intercourse, between periods or after menopause	Watery, bloody vaginal discharge that may be heavy and have a foul odor	Pelvic pain or pain during intercourse	|
Chronic lymphocytic leukemia|Enlarged, but painless, lymph nodes	Fatigue	Fever	Pain in the upper left portion of the abdomen, which may be caused by an enlarged spleen	Night sweats	Weight loss	Frequent infections	|Do what you can to avoid infections. People with chronic lymphocytic leukemia are prone to frequent infections. Take steps to keep yourself healthy. Eat a healthy diet with plenty of fruits and vegetables. Get enough sleep so that you wake feeling rested. Exercise most days of the week. Do your best to avoid people who are sick. Wash your hands frequently and thoroughly to help keep germs away. Keep up to date on your immunizations, including an annual flu shot.	Reduce your risk of second cancers. People with chronic lymphocytic leukemia have a risk of second cancers. Lifestyle changes may help reduce your risk, such as not smoking, and drinking alcohol in moderation, eating a healthy plant-based diet and using sunscreen when you're outside.	Go to all of your appointments. Frequent blood tests to see if your cancer has progressed can wear on you. Each time you go for your test, you may worry that your cancer is worsening. Don't let this stop you from going to your appointments. Instead, expect that you'll have some concern and plan for it. Find relaxing activities while waiting for test results. For instance, exercise, read, or spend time with friends and family.	
Chronic myelogenous leukemia|Easy bleeding	Feeling run-down or tired	Fever	Losing weight without trying	Loss of appetite	Pain or fullness below the ribs on the left side	Pale skin	Sweating excessively during sleep (night sweats)	|Talk to your doctor about your side effects. Powerful cancer medications can cause many side effects, but those side effects often can be managed with other medications or treatments. You don't necessarily have to tough them out.	Don't stop treatment on your own. If you develop unpleasant side effects, such as skin rashes or fatigue, don't simply quit your medication without consulting your health care professionals. Likewise, don't stop taking your medications if you feel better and think your disease may be gone. If you stop taking medication, your disease can quickly and unexpectedly return, even if you've been in remission.	Ask for help if you're having trouble coping. Having a chronic condition can be emotionally overwhelming. Tell your doctor about your feelings. Ask for a referral to a counselor or other specialist with whom you can talk.	
Colon cancer|A change in your bowel habits, including diarrhea or constipation or a change in the consistency of your stool	Rectal bleeding or blood in your stool	Persistent abdominal discomfort, such as cramps, gas or pain	A feeling that your bowel doesn't empty completely	Weakness or fatigue	Unexplained weight loss	|
Canker sore|Are usually small	Are oval shaped with a red edge	Heal without scarring in one to two weeks	|Rinse your mouth. Use salt water or baking soda rinse (dissolve 1 teaspoon of baking soda in 1/2 cup warm water).	Dab a small amount of milk of magnesia on your canker sore a few times a day.	Avoid abrasive, acidic or spicy foods that can cause further irritation and pain.	Apply ice to your canker sores by allowing ice chips to slowly dissolve over the sores.	Brush your teeth gently, using a soft brush and foaming-agent-free toothpaste such as Biotene or Sensodyne ProNamel.	
Carbon monoxide poisoning|Dull headache	Weakness	Dizziness	Nausea or vomiting	Shortness of breath	Confusion	Blurred vision	Loss of consciousness	|
Carcinoid syndrome| Skin flushing. The skin on your face and upper chest feels hot and changes color — ranging from pink to purple. Flushing episodes may last from a few minutes to a few hours or longer. Flushing may happen for no obvious reason, though sometimes it can be triggered by stress, exercise or drinking alcohol. 	Facial skin lesions. Purplish areas of spiderlike veins may appear on the nose and upper lip.	Diarrhea. Frequent, watery stools sometimes accompanied by abdominal cramps may occur in people who have carcinoid syndrome.	Difficulty breathing. Asthma-like signs and symptoms, such as wheezing and shortness of breath, may occur at the same time you experience skin flushing.	Rapid heartbeat. Periods of a fast heart rate could be a sign of carcinoid syndrome.	| Avoid things that cause skin flushing. Certain substances or situations can trigger flushing, such as alcohol or large meals. Some people experience flushing when they're feeling stressed or upset. Keep track of what causes your flushing, and try to avoid situations that trigger flushing. 	Consider taking a multivitamin. Chronic diarrhea makes it difficult for your body to process the vitamins and nutrients in the food you eat. Ask your doctor whether taking a multivitamin may be a good idea for you.	
Cardiogenic shock|Rapid breathing	Severe shortness of breath	Sudden, rapid heartbeat (tachycardia)	Loss of consciousness 	Weak pulse	Sweating	Pale skin	Cold hands or feet	Urinating less than normal or not at all	|
Cardiomyopathy|Breathlessness with exertion or even at rest	Swelling of the legs, ankles and feet	Bloating of the abdomen due to fluid buildup	Cough while lying down	Fatigue	Irregular heartbeats that feel rapid, pounding or fluttering	Chest pain	Dizziness, lightheadedness and fainting	|Quit smoking.	Lose weight if you're overweight.	Eat a healthy diet, including a variety of fruits and vegetables and whole grains.	Reduce the amount of salt in your diet, and aim for less than 1,500 milligrams of sodium daily.	Get modest exercise after discussing with your doctor the most appropriate program of physical activity.	Eliminate or minimize the amount of alcohol you drink. Specific recommendations will depend on the type of cardiomyopathy you have.	Try to manage your stress.	Get enough sleep.	Take all your medications as directed by your doctor.	Go to your doctor for regular follow-up appointments.	
Carotid artery disease|Sudden numbness or weakness in the face or limbs, often on only one side of the body	Sudden trouble speaking and understanding	Sudden trouble seeing in one or both eyes	Sudden dizziness or loss of balance	Sudden, severe headache with no known cause	|Don't smoke. Within a few years of quitting, a former smoker's risk of stroke is similar to a nonsmoker's.	Maintain a healthy weight. Being overweight contributes to other risk factors, such as high blood pressure, cardiovascular disease, diabetes and sleep apnea.	Limit cholesterol and fat. Cutting back on saturated fat, in particular, may reduce buildup of plaques in your arteries.	Eat a variety of fruits and vegetables. They contain nutrients such as potassium, folate and antioxidants, which may protect against a TIA or stroke.	Limit salt. Excess salt may increase blood pressure in people who are sensitive to sodium. Experts recommend that healthy adults eat less than 1,500 milligrams of sodium a day.	Exercise regularly. Exercise can lower your blood pressure, increase your level of high-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol — the "good" cholesterol — and improve the overall health of your blood vessels and heart. It also helps you lose weight, control diabetes and reduce stress.	Limit alcohol.	Control chronic conditions. Managing conditions such as diabetes and high blood pressure helps protect your arteries.	
Carpal tunnel syndrome| Tingling or numbness. You may experience tingling and numbness in your fingers or hand, especially your thumb and index, middle or ring fingers, but not your little finger. This sensation often occurs while holding a steering wheel, phone or newspaper or, commonly, waking you from sleeping. The sensation may extend from your wrist up your arm. Many people "shake out" their hands to try to relieve their symptoms. As the disorder progresses, the numb feeling may become constant. 	Weakness. You may experience weakness in your hand and a tendency to drop objects. This may be due to the numbness in your hand or weakness of the thumb's pinching muscles, which are controlled by the median nerve.	|Take quick breaks from repetitive activities involving the use of your hands.	Rotate your wrists and stretch your palms and fingers.	Take a pain reliever, such as aspirin, ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin IB, others) or naproxen (Aleve).	Wear a wrist splint at night. Wrist splints are generally available over-the-counter at most drugstores or pharmacies. The splint should be snug but not tight.	Avoid sleeping on your hands to help ease the pain or numbness in your wrists and hands.	
Castleman disease|Unicentric Castleman disease. This localized form of the disease affects only a single gland (lymph node) in your lymphatic system.	Multicentric Castleman disease. This type affects multiple lymph nodes and lymphatic tissues, and can severely weaken your immune system. 	|
Cataracts|Clouded, blurred or dim vision 	Increasing difficulty with vision at night 	Sensitivity to light and glare 	Seeing "halos" around lights 	Frequent changes in eyeglass or contact lens prescription 	Fading or yellowing of colors 	Double vision in a single eye 	|Make sure your eyeglasses or contact lenses are the most accurate prescription possible 	Use a magnifying glass to read 	Improve the lighting in your home with more or brighter lamps 	When you go outside during the day, wear sunglasses or a broad-brimmed hat to reduce glare 	Limit your night driving 	
Complex regional pain syndrome|Continuous burning or throbbing pain, usually in your arm, leg, hand or foot	Sensitivity to touch or cold	Swelling of the painful area	Changes in skin temperature — at times your skin may be sweaty; at other times it may be cold	Changes in skin color, which can range from white and mottled to red or blue	Changes in skin texture, which may become tender, thin or shiny in the affected area	Changes in hair and nail growth	Joint stiffness, swelling and damage	Muscle spasms, weakness and loss (atrophy)	Decreased ability to move the affected body part	|
Cavities/tooth decay|Toothache	Tooth sensitivity	Mild to sharp pain when eating or drinking something sweet, hot or cold	Visible holes or pits in your teeth	Brown, black or white staining on any surface of a tooth	Pain when you bite down	|
Celiac disease|Anemia, usually resulting from iron deficiency	Loss of bone density (osteoporosis) or softening of bone (osteomalacia)	Itchy, blistery skin rash (dermatitis herpetiformis)	Damage to dental enamel	Headaches and fatigue	Nervous system injury, including numbness and tingling in the feet and hands, and possible problems with balance	Joint pain	Reduced functioning of the spleen (hyposplenism)	Acid reflux and heartburn	|Barley	Bulgur	Durum	Farina	Graham flour	Malt	Rye	Semolina	Spelt (a form of wheat)	Triticale	Wheat	
Cellulitis|Red area of skin that tends to expand	Swelling	Tenderness	Pain	Warmth	Fever	Red spots	Blisters	Skin dimpling	|
Central nervous system vascular malformations|Arteriovenous malformations. A brain (intracranial) arteriovenous malformation is an abnormal tangle of blood vessels in your brain.	Capillary telangiectasias. Capillary telangiectasias are small dilated blood vessels (capillaries).	Cavernous malformations.. Cavernous malformations are abnormally formed blood vessels in your brain or spinal cord that have the appearance of a mulberry.	Dural arteriovenous fistulas.. Dural arteriovenous fistulas are abnormal connections between arteries and the tough covering over the brain or spinal cord (dura) and a draining vein.	Spinal arteriovenous malformations.. A spinal arteriovenous malformation is an abnormal tangle of blood vessels on, in or near your spinal cord.	Venous malformations.. Venous malformations are abnormally enlarged veins in your brain or spinal cord.	|Arteriovenous malformations. A brain (intracranial) arteriovenous malformation is an abnormal tangle of blood vessels in your brain.	Capillary telangiectasias. Capillary telangiectasias are small dilated blood vessels (capillaries).	Cavernous malformations.. Cavernous malformations are abnormally formed blood vessels in your brain or spinal cord that have the appearance of a mulberry.	Dural arteriovenous fistulas.. Dural arteriovenous fistulas are abnormal connections between arteries and the tough covering over the brain or spinal cord (dura) and a draining vein.	Spinal arteriovenous malformations.. A spinal arteriovenous malformation is an abnormal tangle of blood vessels on, in or near your spinal cord.	Venous malformations.. Venous malformations are abnormally enlarged veins in your brain or spinal cord.	
Cerebral palsy|Variations in muscle tone, such as being either too stiff or too floppy	Stiff muscles and exaggerated reflexes (spasticity)	Stiff muscles with normal reflexes (rigidity)	Lack of muscle coordination (ataxia)	Tremors or involuntary movements 	Slow, writhing movements (athetosis)	Delays in reaching motor skills milestones, such as pushing up on arms, sitting up alone or crawling	Favoring one side of the body, such as reaching with only one hand or dragging a leg while crawling	Difficulty walking, such as walking on toes, a crouched gait, a scissors-like gait with knees crossing or a wide gait	Excessive drooling or problems with swallowing	Difficulty with sucking or eating	Delays in speech development or difficulty speaking	Difficulty with precise motions, such as picking up a crayon or spoon	|
Cervical dystonia|Chin toward shoulder	Ear toward shoulder	Chin straight up	Chin straight down	|Reduce stress. Avoiding situations that cause stress or anxiety is important because stress tends to make your signs and symptoms worse.	Get your rest. Signs often disappear during sleep, so get plenty of rest. You may find relief by taking short breaks during your day to lie on your back and relax.	Use heat. Heat packs may help loosen the taut muscles in your neck and help with pain relief.	Try touching. Sensory tricks, such as touching the opposite side of your face or the back of your head, may cause spasms to stop temporarily. Different sensory tricks work for different people, and if you find one that works, it usually will continue to work for you.	
Cervical spondylosis|Tingling, numbness and weakness in your arms, hands, legs or feet	Lack of coordination and difficulty walking	Loss of bladder or bowel control	|Regular exercise. Maintaining activity will help speed recovery, even if you have to temporarily modify some of your exercises because of neck pain. People who walk daily are less likely to experience neck and low back pain.	Over-the-counter pain relievers. Ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin IB, others), naproxen sodium (Aleve) or acetaminophen (Tylenol, others) is often enough to control the pain associated with cervical spondylosis.	Heat or ice. Applying heat or ice to your neck can ease sore neck muscles.	Soft neck brace. The brace allows your neck muscles to rest. However, a neck brace should be worn for only short periods of time because it can eventually weaken neck muscles.	
Cervicitis|Large amounts of vaginal discharge that's green, brown or yellow and pus-like and that sometimes has an unpleasant odor	Frequent, painful urination	Pain during intercourse	Vaginal bleeding after intercourse, not associated with a menstrual period	|
Chagas disease|Swelling at the infection site	Fever	Fatigue	Rash	Body aches	Eyelid swelling	Headache	Loss of appetite	Nausea, diarrhea or vomiting	Swollen glands	Enlargement of your liver or spleen	|
Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease|Weakness in your legs, ankles and feet 	Loss of muscle bulk in legs and feet 	High foot arches 	Curled toes (hammertoes) 	Decreased ability to run 	Difficulty lifting your foot at the ankle (footdrop) 	Awkward or higher than normal step (gait) 	Frequent tripping or falling 	Decreased sensation or a loss of feeling in your legs and feet 	|Stretch regularly. The goal of stretching is to improve or maintain the range of motion of your joints. Stretching improves your flexibility, balance and coordination. Stretching may also reduce your risk of injury. If you have Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease, regular stretching can prevent or reduce joint deformities that may result from uneven pulling of muscle on your bones. 	Exercise daily. Exercising every day keeps your bones and muscles strong. Low-impact exercises, such as biking and swimming, are less stressful on fragile muscles and joints. By strengthening your muscles and bones, you can improve your balance and coordination, reducing your risk of falls. 	Improve your stability. Muscle weakness associated with Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease may cause you to be unsteady on your feet, which can lead to falling and serious injury. Walking with a cane or a walker can increase your stability. Good lighting at night can help you avoid stumbling and falling. 	
Chest pain|Pressure, fullness or tightness in your chest	Crushing or searing pain that radiates to your back, neck, jaw, shoulders and arms — particularly your left arm	Pain that lasts more than a few minutes, gets worse with activity, goes away and comes back or varies in intensity	Shortness of breath	Cold sweats	Dizziness or weakness	Nausea or vomiting	|
Costochondritis|Occurs on the left side of your breastbone	Is sharp, aching or pressure-like	Affects more than one rib	Worsens when you take a deep breath or cough	|Over-the-counter nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs pain relievers. Ask your doctor about using ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin IB, others) or naproxen sodium (Aleve, others).	Heat or ice. Try placing hot compresses or a heating pad on the painful area several times a day. Keep the heat on a low setting. Ice also might be helpful.	Rest. Avoid activities that make your pain worse.	
Chiari malformation|Type I	Type II	|
Chickenpox|Fever 	Loss of appetite 	Headache 	Tiredness and a general feeling of being unwell (malaise) 	|Put gloves on his or her hands, especially at night 	Trim his or her fingernails 	
Child abuse|Withdrawal from friends or usual activities	Changes in behavior — such as aggression, anger, hostility or hyperactivity — or changes in school performance	Depression, anxiety or unusual fears or a sudden loss of self-confidence	An apparent lack of supervision	Frequent absences from school or reluctance to ride the school bus	Reluctance to leave school activities, as if he or she doesn't want to go home	Attempts at running away	Rebellious or defiant behavior	Attempts at suicide	|Physical abuse. Physical child abuse occurs when a child is purposely physically injured or put at risk of harm by another person.	Sexual abuse. Sexual child abuse is any sexual activity with a child, such as fondling, oral-genital contact, intercourse or exposure to child pornography.	Emotional abuse. Emotional child abuse means injuring a child's self-esteem or emotional well-being. It includes verbal and emotional assault — such as continually belittling or berating a child — as well as isolating, ignoring or rejecting a child.	Medical abuse. When someone purposely makes a child sick, requiring medical attention, it puts the child in serious danger of injury and unnecessary medical care. This may be due to a mental disorder called factitious disorder imposed on another, such as a parent harming a child.	Neglect. Child neglect is failure to provide adequate food, shelter, affection, supervision, education or medical care.	
Childhood apraxia of speech|Difficulty moving smoothly from one sound, syllable or word to another	Groping movements with the jaw, lips or tongue to make the correct movement for speech sounds	Vowel distortions, such as attempting to use the correct vowel, but saying it incorrectly	Using the wrong stress in a word, such as pronouncing "banana" as "BUH-nan-uh" instead of "buh-NAN-uh"	Using equal emphasis on all syllables, such as saying "BUH-NAN-UH"	Separation of syllables, such as putting a pause or gap between syllables	Inconsistency, such as making different errors when trying to say the same word a second time	Difficulty imitating simple words	Inconsistent voicing errors, such as saying "down" instead of "town," or "zoo" instead of "Sue"	|Treatments and drugs	Alternative medicine	
Childhood asthma|Frequent, intermittent coughing 	A whistling or wheezing sound when exhaling 	Shortness of breath 	Chest congestion or tightness 	Chest pain, particularly in younger children 	|Maintain low humidity at home. If you live in a damp climate, talk to your child's doctor about using a device to keep the air drier (dehumidifier). 	Keep indoor air clean. Have a heating and air conditioning professional check your air conditioning system every year. Change the filters in your furnace and air conditioner according to the manufacturer's instructions. Also consider installing a small-particle filter in your ventilation system. 	Reduce pet dander. If your child is allergic to dander, it's best to avoid pets with fur or feathers. Regularly bathing or grooming your pets also may reduce the amount of dander in your surroundings. 	Use your air conditioner. Air conditioning helps reduce the amount of airborne pollen from trees, grasses and weeds that finds its way indoors. Air conditioning also lowers indoor humidity and can reduce your child's exposure to dust mites. If you don't have air conditioning, try to keep your windows closed during pollen season. 	Keep dust to a minimum. Reduce dust that may aggravate nighttime symptoms by replacing certain items in your bedroom. For example, encase pillows, mattresses and box springs in dust-proof covers. Consider removing carpeting and installing hard flooring, particularly in your child's bedroom. Use washable curtains and blinds. 	Clean regularly. Clean your home at least once a week to remove dust and allergens. 	Reduce your child's exposure to cold air. If your child's asthma is worsened by cold, dry air, wearing a face mask outside can help. 	
Childhood obesity||Be a role model. Choose healthy foods and active pastimes for yourself. If you need to lose weight, doing so will motivate your child to do likewise. Children are good learners and they often mimic what they see.	Involve the whole family. Make healthy eating a priority and emphasize how important it is for the whole family to be physically active. This avoids singling out the child who is overweight.	
Childhood schizophrenia|Language delays	Late or unusual crawling	Late walking	Other abnormal motor behaviors — for example, rocking or arm flapping	|Take medications as directed. Try to make sure that your child takes medications as prescribed, even if he or she is feeling well and has no current symptoms. If medications are stopped or infrequently taken, the symptoms are likely to come back and your doctor will have a hard time knowing what the best and safest dose is.	Check first before taking other medications. Contact the doctor who's treating your child for schizophrenia before your child takes medications prescribed by another doctor or before taking any over-the-counter medications, vitamins, minerals, herbs or other supplements. These can interact with schizophrenia medications.	Pay attention to warning signs. You and your child may have identified things that may trigger symptoms, cause a relapse or prevent your child from carrying out daily activities. Make a plan so you know what to do if symptoms return. Contact your child's doctor or therapist if you notice any changes in symptoms to prevent the situation from worsening.	Make physical activity and healthy eating a priority. Medications used to treat schizophrenia are associated with an increased risk of obesity and high cholesterol in children. Work with your child's doctor to make a nutrition and physical activity plan for your child that will help manage weight and benefit heart health.	Avoid drugs, tobacco and alcohol. Alcohol and illegal drugs can worsen schizophrenia symptoms. Make sure your child isn't using drugs or alcohol. If necessary, get appropriate treatment for a substance abuse problem.	
Chlamydia|Painful urination	Lower abdominal pain	Vaginal discharge in women	Discharge from the penis in men	Painful sexual intercourse in women	Bleeding between periods and after sex in women	Testicular pain in men	|
Cholecystitis|Severe pain in your upper right abdomen	Pain that radiates from to your right shoulder or back	Tenderness over your abdomen when it's touched	Nausea	Vomiting	Fever	|
Cholera|Diarrhea. Cholera-related diarrhea comes on suddenly and may quickly cause dangerous fluid loss — as much as a quart (about 1 liter) an hour. Diarrhea due to cholera often has a pale, milky appearance that resembles water in which rice has been rinsed (rice-water stool).	Nausea and vomiting. Occurring especially in the early stages of cholera, vomiting may persist for hours at a time.	 Dehydration. Dehydration can develop within hours after the onset of cholera symptoms. Depending on how many body fluids have been lost, dehydration can range from mild to severe. A loss of 10 percent or more of total body weight indicates severe dehydration. Signs and symptoms of cholera dehydration include irritability, lethargy, sunken eyes, a dry mouth, extreme thirst, dry and shriveled skin that's slow to bounce back when pinched into a fold, little or no urine output, low blood pressure, and an irregular heartbeat (arrhythmia). 	|
Cholestasis of pregnancy|Yellowing of the skin and whites of the eyes (jaundice)	Nausea	Loss of appetite	|Warm baths, which seem to lower the intensity of the itching for some women	Icing a particularly itchy patch of skin, which may temporarily reduce the itch	
Chronic constipation|Passing fewer than three stools a week	Having lumpy or hard stools	Straining to have bowel movements	Feeling as though there's a blockage in your rectum that prevents bowel movements	Feeling as though you can't completely empty the stool from your rectum	Needing help to empty your rectum, such as using your hands to press on your abdomen and using a finger to remove stool from your rectum	|
Chronic cough|A runny or stuffy nose	A feeling of liquid running down the back of your throat	Frequent throat clearing and sore throat	Hoarseness	Wheezing and shortness of breath	Heartburn or a sour taste in your mouth	In rare cases, coughing up blood	|Avoid allergens. If your chronic cough can be traced back to nasal allergies, try to avoid the substances that cause your symptoms.	Quit smoking. The most common cause of chronic bronchitis, smoking irritates your lungs and can worsen coughs caused by other factors.	Reduce acid reflux. A cough caused by acid reflux can often be treated with lifestyle changes alone. This includes eating smaller, more frequent meals; waiting three to four hours after a meal before lying down; and elevating the head of the bed at night.	
Chronic daily headaches|Chronic migraine	Chronic tension-type headache	New daily persistent headache	Hemicrania continua	|
Chronic fatigue syndrome|Fatigue	Loss of memory or concentration	Sore throat	Enlarged lymph nodes in your neck or armpits	Unexplained muscle pain	Pain that moves from one joint to another without swelling or redness	Headache of a new type, pattern or severity	Unrefreshing sleep	Extreme exhaustion lasting more than 24 hours after physical or mental exercise	|Reduce stress. Develop a plan to avoid or limit overexertion and emotional stress. Allow yourself time each day to relax. That may mean learning how to say no without guilt.	Improve sleep habits. Go to bed and get up at the same time each day. Limit daytime napping and avoid caffeine, alcohol and nicotine.	Pace yourself. Keep your activity on an even level. If you do too much on your good days, you may have more bad days.	
Chronic hives (urticaria)|Batches of red or white welts (wheals), usually on the face, trunk, arms or legs	Welts that vary in size, change shape, and appear and fade repeatedly as the reaction runs its course	Itching, which may be severe	Swelling that causes pain or burning (angioedema), especially inside the throat and around the eyes, cheeks, lips, hands, feet and genitals	A tendency for signs and symptoms to flare with triggers such as heat, exercise and stress	A tendency for symptoms to recur frequently and unpredictably, sometimes for months or years	|Wear loose, light clothing.	Avoid scratching or using harsh soaps.	Cool the affected area with a shower, fan, cool cloth or soothing lotion.	Keep a diary of when and where hives occur, what you were doing, what you were eating, and so on. This may help you and your doctor identify triggers.	Avoid known triggers, such as certain foods or additives, alcohol, pain relievers, heat, cold, exertion, and stress.	
Chronic kidney disease|Nausea	Vomiting	Loss of appetite	Fatigue and weakness	Sleep problems	Changes in urine output	Decreased mental sharpness	Muscle twitches and cramps	Hiccups	Swelling of feet and ankles	Persistent itching	Chest pain, if fluid builds up around the lining of the heart	Shortness of breath, if fluid builds up in the lungs	High blood pressure (hypertension) that's difficult to control	|Avoid products with added salt. Lower the amount of sodium you eat each day by avoiding products with added salt, including many convenience foods, such as frozen dinners, canned soups and fast foods. Other foods with added salt include salty snack foods, canned vegetables, and processed meats and cheeses.	Choose lower potassium foods. Your dietitian may recommend that you choose lower potassium foods at each meal. High-potassium foods include bananas, oranges, potatoes, spinach and tomatoes. Examples of low-potassium foods include apples, cabbage, carrots, green beans, grapes and blueberries. Be aware that many salt substitutes contain potassium, so you should avoid them if you have kidney failure.	Limit the amount of protein you eat. Your dietitian will estimate the appropriate number of grams of protein you should eat each day and make recommendations based on that amount. High-protein foods include lean meats, eggs, milk, cheese and beans. Low-protein foods include vegetables, fruits, breads and cereals.	
COPD|Shortness of breath, especially during physical activities	Wheezing	Chest tightness	Having to clear your throat first thing in the morning, due to excess mucus in your lungs	A chronic cough that produces sputum that may be clear, white, yellow or greenish	Blueness of the lips or fingernail beds (cyanosis)	Frequent respiratory infections	Lack of energy	Unintended weight loss (in later stages)	|Control your breathing. Talk to your doctor or respiratory therapist about techniques for breathing more efficiently throughout the day. Also be sure to discuss breathing positions and relaxation techniques that you can use when you're short of breath.	Clear your airways. With COPD, mucus tends to collect in your air passages and can be difficult to clear. Controlled coughing, drinking plenty of water and using a humidifier may help.	Exercise regularly. It may seem difficult to exercise when you have trouble breathing, but regular exercise can improve your overall strength and endurance and strengthen your respiratory muscles.	Eat healthy foods. A healthy diet can help you maintain your strength. If you're underweight, your doctor may recommend nutritional supplements. If you're overweight, losing weight can significantly help your breathing, especially during times of exertion.	Avoid smoke and air pollution. In addition to quitting smoking, it's important to avoid places where others smoke. Secondhand smoke may contribute to further lung damage. Other types of air pollution also can irritate your lungs.	See your doctor regularly. Stick to your appointment schedule, even if you're feeling fine. It's important to steadily monitor your lung function. And be sure to get your annual flu vaccine in the fall to help prevent infections that can worsen your COPD. Ask your doctor when you need the pneumococcal vaccine.	
Chronic pelvic pain in women|Severe and steady pain 	Pain that comes and goes (intermittent) 	Dull aching 	Sharp pains or cramping 	Pressure or heaviness deep within your pelvis 	|Practicing meditation 	Using simple deep breathing 	Increasing physical activity and exercise 	Getting enough sleep 	
Chronic sinusitis|Drainage of a thick, yellow or greenish discharge from the nose or down the back of the throat 	Nasal obstruction or congestion, causing difficulty breathing through your nose	Pain, tenderness and swelling around your eyes, cheeks, nose or forehead	Reduced sense of smell and taste	|Rest. This will help your body fight inflammation and speed recovery.	Drink fluids, such as water or juice. This will help dilute mucous secretions and promote drainage. Avoid beverages that contain caffeine or alcohol, as they can be dehydrating. Drinking alcohol can also worsen the swelling of the lining of the sinuses and nose.	Moisturize your sinus cavities. Drape a towel over your head as you breathe in the vapor from a bowl of medium-hot water. Keep the vapor directed toward your face. Or take a hot shower, breathing in the warm, moist air. This will help ease pain and help mucus drain.	Apply warm compresses to your face. Place warm, damp towels around your nose, cheeks and eyes to ease facial pain.	Rinse out your nasal passages. Use a specially designed squeeze bottle (Sinus Rinse, others), saline canister or neti pot to rinse your nasal passages. This home remedy, called nasal lavage, can help clear your sinuses. If you make your own rinse, use water that's contaminant-free — distilled, sterile, previously boiled and cooled, or filtered using a filter with an absolute pore size of 1 micron or smaller — to make up the irrigation solution. Also be sure to rinse the irrigation device after each use with contaminant-free water, and leave open to air-dry.	Sleep with your head elevated. This will help your sinuses drain, reducing congestion.	
Chronic traumatic encephalopathy|Alzheimer's disease	Parkinson's disease	Frontotemporal dementia	Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) — also known as Lou Gehrig's disease	|
Churg-Strauss syndrome|Asthma. The primary sign of Churg-Strauss syndrome, asthma develops on average three to nine years before other signs and symptoms appear. In people with Churg-Strauss syndrome who already have asthma, symptoms usually become worse and may require steroids for control. Other people develop what is known as late-onset asthma. Developing asthma, even later in life, doesn't necessarily mean that you have Churg-Strauss syndrome, however. 	Hay fever (allergic rhinitis). This affects the mucous membranes of your nose, causing runny nose, sneezing and itching. 	Sinus pain and inflammation (sinusitis). You may experience facial pain and develop nasal polyps, which are soft, noncancerous (benign) growths that develop as a result of chronic inflammation. 	|Protect your bones. If you're taking cortisone, it's essential to get adequate amounts of calcium and vitamin D to prevent bone loss and possible fractures. Ask your doctor how much vitamin D and calcium you need in your diet, and discuss whether or not you need to take any supplements. 	Exercise. Exercise can help you maintain a healthy weight, which is important when you're taking corticosteroid medications that can cause weight gain. Strength training and weight-bearing exercises such as walking and jogging also help improve bone health. 	Stop smoking. This is one of the most significant things you can do for your overall health. By itself, smoking causes serious health problems. It also makes problems you already have worse and can increase the side effects of medications you're taking. 	Adopt a healthy diet. Steroids can cause high blood sugar levels and eventually, type 2 diabetes. Emphasizing foods that help keep blood sugar stable, such as fruits, vegetables and whole grains, is helpful. 	Keep doctor appointments. During therapy for Churg-Strauss syndrome, your doctor will monitor you closely for side effects. This will likely include regular bone scans, eye exams, and tests for blood pressure, blood sugar and cholesterol levels. In addition, your doctor will look for signs of Churg-Strauss syndrome affecting new organs (relapse). Be sure to keep these appointments. If caught in time, it's possible to reverse many of the side effects resulting from steroid use. 	
Cirrhosis|Fatigue	Bleeding easily	Bruising easily	Itchy skin	Yellow discoloration in the skin and eyes (jaundice)	Fluid accumulation in your abdomen (ascites)	Loss of appetite	Nausea	Swelling in your legs	Weight loss	Confusion, drowsiness and slurred speech (hepatic encephalopathy)	Spider-like blood vessels on your skin	|Don't drink alcohol. Whether your cirrhosis was caused by chronic alcohol use or another disease, avoid alcohol. Drinking alcohol may cause further liver damage.	Eat a low-sodium diet. Excess salt can cause your body to retain fluids, worsening swelling in your abdomen and legs. Use herbs for seasoning your food, rather than salt. Choose prepared foods that are low in sodium.	Eat a healthy diet. People with cirrhosis can experience malnutrition. Combat this with a healthy plant-based diet that includes a variety of fruits and vegetables. Choose lean protein, such as legumes, poultry or fish. Avoid raw seafood.	Avoid infections. Cirrhosis make sit more difficult for you to fight off infections. Protect yourself by avoiding people who are sick and washing your hands frequently. Get vaccinated for hepatitis A and B, influenza, and pneumonia.	Use over-the-counter medications carefully. Cirrhosis makes it more difficult for your liver to process drugs. For this reason, ask your doctor before taking any medications, including nonprescription drugs. Avoid drugs such as aspirin and ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin IB). If you have liver damage, your doctor may recommend you avoid acetaminophen (Tylenol, others) or take it in low doses for pain relief.	
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease|Personality changes	Anxiety	Depression	Memory loss	Impaired thinking	Blurred vision or blindness	Insomnia	Difficulty speaking	Difficulty swallowing	Sudden, jerky movements	|
Claudication|Pain when exercising. You may feel pain or discomfort in your feet, calves, thighs, hips or buttocks, depending on where you might have artery narrowing or damage. Claudication can also occur in your arms, although this is less common.	Intermittent pain. Your pain may come and go as you do less-strenuous activities.	Pain when at rest. As your condition progresses, you may feel pain in your legs even when you're sitting or lying down.	Discolored skin or ulcerations. If blood flow is severely reduced, your toes or fingers may look bluish or feel cold to the touch. You may also develop sores on your lower legs, feet, toes, arms or fingers.	|Don't smoke. Smoking is the most significant risk factor for the development and worsening of peripheral artery disease. Smoking increases the chance that you'll eventually require an amputation or even die of the disease. Avoid secondhand smoke, too.	Exercise. You may wonder how exercise can be helpful if that's what brings on the claudication pain. Actually, exercise helps condition your muscles so that they use oxygen more efficiently. So even if your muscles are getting less oxygen, they can use what they do get more effectively. That can eventually mean less pain during exertion. Your health care team can help develop a supervised exercise program that will enable you to gradually increase the distance you're able to walk without pain and increase your overall mobility.	Know and control your cholesterol levels. If your cholesterol levels aren't what they need to be, your doctor may recommend medication to get them to the proper levels. A meal plan that includes a variety of low-fat foods, emphasizing fruits, vegetables, grains and legumes, can help, too. Combined with exercise, a healthy diet can help control your blood pressure and cholesterol levels, both of which can contribute to atherosclerosis.	Avoid certain medications. Don't use drugs that cause your blood vessels to constrict. Many sinus and cold medications sold over-the-counter contain pseudoephedrine, which is known to constrict blood vessels. Ask your doctor if there are any other medications you need to avoid.	Avoid injury to your feet and legs. Reduced blood flow increases your risk of complications from injuries. Choose well-fitting shoes that will protect your feet if you are participating in activities or work that might lead to injury.	Keep your legs below your heart. Doing so can help improve the circulation to your feet. To keep the blood flowing well to your legs and feet at night, it helps to raise the head of your bed by 4 to 6 inches.	
Cleft lip and cleft palate|A split in the lip and roof of the mouth (palate) that can affect one or both sides of the face	A split in the lip that can appear as only a small notch in the lip or can extend from the lip through the upper gum and palate into the bottom of the nose	A split in the roof of the mouth that doesn't affect the appearance of the face	|
Clubfoot|The top of the foot is usually twisted downward and inward, increasing the arch and turning the heel inward. 	The foot may be turned so severely that it actually looks as if it's upside down. 	The calf muscles in the affected leg are usually underdeveloped. 	The affected foot may be up to 1/2 inch (about 1 centimeter) shorter than the other foot. 	|
Cluster headache|Excruciating pain, generally located in or around one eye, but may radiate to other areas of your face, head, neck and shoulders	One-sided pain	Restlessness	Excessive tearing	Redness in your eye on the affected side	Stuffy or runny nasal passage in your nostril on the affected side of your face	Sweaty, pale skin (pallor) on your face	Swelling around your eye on the affected side of your face	Drooping eyelid	|Stick to a regular sleep schedule. Cluster periods may begin when there are changes in your normal sleep schedule. During a cluster period, follow your usual sleep routine.	Avoid alcohol. Alcohol consumption, including beer and wine, often can quickly trigger a headache during a cluster period.	
Coarctation of the aorta|Pale skin	Irritability	Heavy sweating	Difficulty breathing	Difficulty feeding	| Get regular exercise. Regular exercise helps to lower blood pressure. Talk to your doctor about whether you need to restrict certain physical activities, such as weightlifting, which can temporarily raise your blood pressure. Your doctor may evaluate you and conduct exercise tests prior to deciding if you should participate in competitive sports or weightlifting. 	 Consider pregnancy carefully. Before becoming pregnant, talk to your doctor to determine if you can undergo pregnancy safely. Women with coarctation of the aorta, even after repair, may have a higher risk of aortic rupture, aortic dissection or other complications during pregnancy and delivery. Doctors will also evaluate whether your blood pressure is controlled. If you've had aortic coarctation repair and are considering becoming pregnant, careful management of your blood pressure is important to help keep you and your baby healthy. 	 Prevent endocarditis. Endocarditis is an inflammation of the inner lining of the heart or of its structures, caused by a bacterial infection. You generally won't need to take antibiotics before certain dental procedures to prevent endocarditis. However, if you've had endocarditis in the past, or if you had prosthetic material placed during surgery, then your doctor may recommend antibiotics. Ask your doctor about the most appropriate approach for you. 	
Cold urticaria|Temporary reddish, itchy welts (hives) on the area of skin that was exposed to cold	A worsening of the reaction as the skin warms	Swelling of hands when holding cold objects	Swelling of lips and throat when consuming cold food or drink	|Antihistamines. These medications block the symptom-producing release of histamine. Over-the-counter (nonprescription) products include loratadine (Claritin), fexofenadine (Allegra), cetirizine (Zyrtec) and levocetirizine (Xyzal).	Avoid sudden changes in temperature. Take special care to protect your skin from the cold.	
Cold sore|Tingling and itching. Many people feel an itching, burning or tingling sensation around their lips for a day or so before a small, hard, painful spot appears and blisters erupt.	Blisters. Small fluid-filled blisters typically break out along the border where the outside edge of the lips meets the skin of the face. Cold sores can also occur around the nose or on the cheeks.	Oozing and crusting. The small blisters may merge and then burst, leaving shallow open sores that will ooze fluid and then crust over.	|Apply a cold sore ointment. Docosanol (Abreva) is an over-the-counter cream for cold sores. It must be applied frequently and may shorten an outbreak by a few hours or a day.	Try other cold sore remedies. Some over-the-counter preparations contain a drying agent, such as alcohol, that may speed healing.	Use lip balms and cream. Protect your lips from the sun with a zinc oxide cream or lip balm with sunblock. If your lips become dry, apply a moisturizing cream.	Apply a cool compress. A cool, damp cloth may reduce redness, help remove crusting and promote healing.	Apply pain-relieving creams. Over-the-counter creams with lidocaine or benzocaine may offer some pain relief.	
Common cold|Runny or stuffy nose 	Itchy or sore throat 	Cough 	Congestion 	Slight body aches or a mild headache 	Sneezing 	Watery eyes 	Low-grade fever 	Mild fatigue 	|Drink lots of fluids. Water, juice, clear broth or warm lemon water are all good choices. They help replace fluids lost during mucus production or fever. Avoid alcohol and caffeine, which can cause dehydration, and cigarette smoke, which can aggravate your symptoms. 	Try chicken soup. Generations of parents have spooned chicken soup into their sick children's mouths. Now scientists have put chicken soup to the test, discovering that it does seem to help relieve cold and flu symptoms in two ways. First, it acts as an anti-inflammatory by inhibiting the movement of neutrophils — immune system cells that help the body's response to inflammation. Second, it temporarily speeds up the movement of mucus through the nose, helping relieve congestion and limiting the time viruses are in contact with the nasal lining. 	Get some rest. If possible, stay home from work or school if you have a fever or a bad cough or are drowsy after taking medications. This will give you a chance to rest as well as reduce the chances that you'll infect others. Wear a mask when you have a cold if you live or work with someone with a chronic disease or compromised immune system. 	Adjust your room's temperature and humidity. Keep your room warm, but not overheated. If the air is dry, a cool-mist humidifier or vaporizer can moisten the air and help ease congestion and coughing. Be sure to keep the humidifier clean to prevent the growth of bacteria and molds. 	Soothe your throat. A saltwater gargle — 1/4 to 1/2 teaspoon salt dissolved in an 8-ounce glass of warm water — can temporarily relieve a sore or scratchy throat. 	Use saline nasal drops. To help relieve nasal congestion, try saline nasal drops. You can buy these drops over-the-counter, and they're effective, safe and nonirritating, even for children. In infants, experts recommend instilling several saline drops into one nostril, then gently suctioning that nostril with a bulb syringe (insert the bulb syringe about 1/4 to 1/2 inch, or about 6 to 12 millimeters). Doing this before feeding your baby can improve your child's ability to nurse or take a bottle, and before bedtime it may improve sleep. Saline nasal sprays may be used in older children. 	
Colic|Predictable crying episodes. A baby who has colic often cries about the same time every day, usually in the late afternoon or evening. Colic episodes may last from a few minutes to three hours or more on any given day. Your baby may have a bowel movement or pass gas near the end of the colic episode.	Intense or inconsolable crying. Colic crying is intense, sounds distressed and is often high pitched. Your baby's face may flush, and he or she is extremely difficult — if not impossible — to comfort.	Crying that occurs for no apparent reason. It's normal for babies to cry sometimes. But, crying usually means your baby needs something, such as food or a clean diaper. Crying associated with colic occurs with no clear cause.	Posture changes. Curled up legs, clenched fists and tensed abdominal muscles are common during colic episodes.	|Hold your baby as upright as possible during feedings. Pause often during feedings to burp your baby. Sometimes smaller, more-frequent feedings are helpful. If you're breast-feeding, it may help to allow your baby to feed at one breast until it's nearly empty before switching sides. This provides your baby with rich, fatty hindmilk, potentially more satisfying than the lighter, thirst-quenching foremilk present at the start of a feeding.	Consider changing your diet, if breast-feeding. A breast-feeding mother's diet likely doesn't play a role in baby's colicky symptoms. However, in families with a history of allergies, removing potential allergens from your diet might uncover an unknown food allergy in your baby. If you breast-feed, your baby's doctor may suggest that you try eliminating foods most likely to cause allergy — such as dairy, peanuts, tree nuts, wheat, soy and fish — for two weeks to see if your baby's symptoms improve. However, first talk with your baby's doctor before changing your diet.	Switch baby's formula. As with breast-feeding, your baby's formula isn't a likely cause of his or her symptoms. But, changing to a type of formula called hydrolysate infant formula (Similac Expert Care Alimentum, Nutramigen, Pregestimil) might make a difference if your baby is allergic to cow's milk or has a milk intolerance. The whole milk proteins in these formulas are already broken down, which makes them easier to digest. If an allergy or intolerance was causing your baby's symptoms, you should see a response within two days of changing formula. If there's no improvement, you can switch back to the original formula as the hydrosolate formula is much more expensive than standard formula.	Change bottles. There are a variety of bottles and nipples from which to choose. Trying a different type of bottle or nipple could help ease some of your baby's symptoms. Bottles that have disposable, collapsible bags may lessen the amount of air your baby swallows.	
Colon polyps|Rectal bleeding. This can be a sign of colon polyps or cancer or other conditions, such as hemorrhoids or minor tears in your anus.	Change in stool color. Blood can show up as red streaks in your stool or make stool appear black. A change in color may also be caused by foods, medications and supplements.	Change in bowel habits. Constipation or diarrhea that lasts longer than a week may indicate the presence of a large colon polyp. But a number of other conditions can also cause changes in bowel habits.	Pain, nausea or vomiting. A large colon polyp can partially obstruct your bowel, leading to crampy abdominal pain, nausea and vomiting.	Iron deficiency anemia. Bleeding from polyps can occur slowly over time, without visible blood in your stool. Chronic bleeding robs your body of the iron needed to produce the substance that allows red blood cells to carry oxygen to your body (hemoglobin). The result is iron deficiency anemia, which can make you feel tired and short of breath.	|Adenomatous. About two-thirds of all polyps are adenomatous. Only a small percentage of them actually become cancerous. But nearly all malignant polyps are adenomatous. 	Serrated. Depending on their size and location in the colon, serrated polyps may become cancerous. Small serrated polyps in the lower colon, also known as hyperplastic polyps, are rarely malignant. Larger serrated polyps — which are typically flat (sessile), difficult to detect and located in the upper colon — are precancerous. 	Inflammatory. These polyps may follow a bout of ulcerative colitis or Crohn's disease of the colon. Although the polyps themselves are not a significant threat, having ulcerative colitis or Crohn's disease of the colon increases your overall risk of colon cancer. 	
Coma|Closed eyes	Depressed brainstem reflexes, such as pupils not responding to light	No responses of limbs, except for reflex movements	No response to painful stimuli, except for reflex movements	Irregular breathing	|
Common cold in babies|A congested or runny nose	Nasal discharge that may be clear at first but then usually becomes thicker and turns shades of yellow or green	|Offer plenty of fluids. Liquids are important to avoid dehydration. Encourage your baby to take in his or her normal amount of fluids. Extra fluids aren't necessary. If you're breast-feeding your baby, keep it up. Breast milk offers extra protection from cold-causing germs.	Thin the mucus. Your baby's doctor may recommend saline nose drops to loosen thick nasal mucus. Look for these over-the-counter drops in your local pharmacy.	Suction your baby's nose. Keep your baby's nasal passages clear with a rubber-bulb syringe. Squeeze the bulb syringe to expel the air. Then insert the tip of the bulb about 1/4 to 1/2 inch (0.64 to 1.27 centimeters) into your baby's nostril, pointing toward the back and side of the nose. Release the bulb, holding it in place while it suctions the mucus from your baby's nose. Remove the syringe from your baby's nostril, and empty the contents onto a tissue by squeezing the bulb rapidly while holding the tip down. Repeat as often as needed for each nostril. Clean the bulb syringe with soap and water.	Moisten the air. Running a humidifier in your baby's room can help improve runny nose and nasal congestion symptoms. Aim the mist away from your baby's crib to keep the bedding from becoming damp. To prevent mold growth, change the water daily and follow the manufacturer's instructions for cleaning the unit. It might also help to sit with your baby in a steamy bathroom for a few minutes before bedtime.	
Common warts|Small, fleshy, grainy bumps	Flesh-colored, white, pink or tan	Rough to the touch	Sprinkled with black pinpoints, which are small, clotted blood vessels	|Peeling medicine (salicylic acid). Nonprescription wart removal products such as salicylic acid are available as a patch or a liquid. For common warts, look for a 17 percent salicylic acid solution or a 15 percent patch. These products require daily use, often for a few weeks. For best results, soak your wart in warm water for 10 to 20 minutes before applying the medication. File away any dead skin with a disposable emery board or a pumice stone between treatments.	Freezing. Some liquid nitrogen products are available in nonprescription liquid or spray form (Compound W Freeze Off, Dr. Scholl's Freeze Away, others). The Food and Drug Administration cautions that some wart removers are flammable and shouldn't be used around fire, flame, heat sources (such as curling irons) and lit cigarettes.	 Duct tape. Cover the wart with silver duct tape for six days. Then soak it in water and gently remove dead tissue with a pumice stone or disposable emery board. Leave the wart exposed for about 12 hours, and then repeat the process until the wart is gone. Study results have been mixed on the effectiveness of duct tape in removing warts, either alone or with other therapies. 	
Complicated grief|Intense sorrow and pain at the thought of your loved one	Focus on little else but your loved one's death	Extreme focus on reminders of the loved one or excessive avoidance of reminders	Intense and persistent longing or pining for the deceased	Problems accepting the death	Numbness or detachment	Bitterness about your loss	Feeling that life holds no meaning or purpose	Irritability or agitation	Lack of trust in others	Inability to enjoy life or think back on positive experiences with your loved one	|Accepting the reality of your loss	Allowing yourself to experience the pain of your loss	Adjusting to a new reality in which the deceased is no longer present	Having other relationships	
Compulsive gambling|Gaining a thrill from taking big gambling risks 	Taking increasingly bigger gambling risks 	Preoccupation with gambling 	Reliving past gambling experiences 	Gambling as a way to escape problems or feelings of helplessness, guilt or depression 	Taking time from work or family life to gamble 	Concealing or lying about gambling 	Feeling guilt or remorse after gambling 	Borrowing money or stealing to gamble 	Failed efforts to cut back on gambling 	|
Compulsive sexual behavior|Your sexual impulses are intense and feel as if they're beyond your control	Even though you feel driven to do certain sexual behaviors, you may or may not find the activity a source of pleasure or satisfaction	You use compulsive sexual behavior as an escape from other problems, such as loneliness, depression, anxiety or stress	You continue to engage in sexual behaviors that have serious consequences, such as the potential for getting or giving someone else a sexually transmitted infection, the loss of important relationships, trouble at work, or legal problems	You have trouble establishing and maintaining emotional closeness, even if you're married or in a committed relationship	|
Concussion|Headache or a feeling of pressure in the head	Temporary loss of consciousness	Confusion or feeling as if in a fog	Amnesia surrounding the traumatic event	Dizziness or "seeing stars"	Ringing in the ears	Nausea	Vomiting	Slurred speech	Delayed response to questions	Appearing dazed	Fatigue	|
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia|Classic congenital adrenal hyperplasia. This more severe form of the disease is usually detected in infancy or early childhood.	Nonclassic congenital adrenal hyperplasia. This milder form usually becomes evident in late childhood or early adulthood.	|
Congenital heart defects in children|Pale gray or blue skin color (cyanosis)	Rapid breathing	Flared nostrils	Grunting when breathing	Swelling in the legs, abdomen or areas around the eyes	Shortness of breath during feedings, leading to poor weight gain	|
Congenital heart disease in adults|Abnormal heart rhythms (arrhythmias)	A bluish tint to the skin (cyanosis)	Shortness of breath	Tiring quickly upon exertion	Dizziness or fainting	Swelling of body tissue or organs (edema)	|
Conjoined twins|Joined at the chest. One of the most common of conjoined twins, thoracopagus twins are joined at the chest. They often have a shared heart and may also share one liver and upper intestine. 	Joined near the bellybutton. Omphalopagus twins are joined near the bellybutton. Many omphalopagus twins share the liver, and some share the lower part of the small intestine (ileum) and colon. They generally do not, however, share a heart. 	Joined at the base of the spine. Pygopagus twins are joined at the base of the spine and commonly face away from one another. Some pygopagus twins share the lower gastrointestinal tract, and a few share the genital and urinary organs. 	Joined at the pelvis. Ischiopagus twins are joined at the pelvis. Many ischiopagus twins share the lower gastrointestinal tract, as well as the liver and genital and urinary tract organs. Each twin may have two legs or in some cases, one pair of legs and even a fused leg, though that's uncommon. 	Joined at the head. Craniopagus twins are joined at the head. Craniopagus twins share a portion of the skull, and possibly brain tissue. This sharing may involve the cerebral cortex — the part of the brain that plays a central role in memory, language and perception. 	|
Constipation in children|Less than three bowel movements a week	Bowel movements that are hard, dry and difficult to pass	Pain while having a bowel movement	Abdominal pain	Nausea	Traces of liquid or clay-like stool in your child's underwear — a sign that stool is backed up in the rectum	Blood on the surface of hard stool	| A high-fiber diet. A diet rich in fiber can help your child's body form soft, bulky stool. The recommended intake for dietary fiber is 14 grams for every 1,000 calories in your child's diet. For younger children, this translates to an intake of about 20 grams of dietary fiber a day. For adolescent girls and young women, it's 29 grams a day, and for adolescent boys and young men, it's 38 grams a day. Offer your child high-fiber foods, such as beans, whole grains, fruits and vegetables. But start slowly, adding just several grams of fiber a day over several weeks to reduce the amount of gas and bloating that can occur in someone who's not used to consuming high-fiber foods. 	Adequate fluids. Water and other fluids will help soften your child's stool. Be wary of offering your child too much milk, however. For some children, excess milk contributes to constipation.	Adequate time for bowel movements. Encourage your child to sit on the toilet for five to 10 minutes within 30 minutes of each meal. Follow the routine every day, even during holidays and vacations.	Be supportive. Reward your child's efforts, not results. Give children small rewards for trying to move their bowels. Possible rewards include stickers or a special book or game that's only available after (or possibly during) toilet time. And don't punish a child who has soiled his or her underwear.	
Contact dermatitis|Red rash or bumps	Itching, which may be severe	Dry, cracked, scaly skin, if your condition is chronic	Blisters, draining fluid and crusting, if your reaction is severe	Swelling, burning or tenderness	|Avoid allowing the reaction-causing substance to touch your skin. If it's a piece of jewelry, you may be able to wear it by putting a barrier between you and the metal. For example, line the inside of a bracelet with a piece of clear tape or paint it with clear nail polish.	Apply an anti-itch cream or calamine lotion to the affected area. A nonprescription cream containing at least 1 percent hydrocortisone can temporarily relieve your itch.	Take an over-the-counter anti-itch drug. A nonprescription oral antihistamine, such as diphenhydramine (Benadryl, others), may be helpful if your itching is severe.	Apply cool, wet compresses. Moisten soft washcloths and hold them against the rash to soothe your skin for 15 to 30 minutes. Repeat several times a day.	Avoid scratching. Trim your nails. If you can't keep from scratching an itchy area, cover it with a dressing and bandage.	Soak in a comfortably cool bath. Sprinkle the water with baking soda or an oatmeal-based bath product (Aveeno, others).	Wear smooth-textured cotton clothing. This helps avoid irritation.	Choose mild soaps without dyes or perfumes. Rinse completely, pat your skin dry and apply moisturizer.	Protect your hands with moisturizers and gloves. Reapply moisturizers throughout the day. And choose gloves based on what you're protecting your hands from. For example, plastic gloves lined with cotton are good if your hands are often wet.	
Convergence insufficiency|Eyestrain	Headaches	Difficulty reading — words blur or seem to move on the page	Double vision	Difficulty concentrating	Squinting or closing one eye	|
Conversion disorder|Weakness or paralysis	Abnormal movement, such as tremors or difficulty walking	Loss of balance	Difficulty swallowing or "a lump in the throat"	Seizures or convulsions	Episode of unresponsiveness	|
Cough headaches|Begin suddenly with and just after coughing or other types of straining	Typically last a few seconds to a few minutes — some can last up to two hours	Cause sharp, stabbing or splitting pain	Usually affect both sides of your head and may be worse in the back of your head	May be followed by a dull, aching pain for hours	|
Craniosynostosis|A misshapen skull, with the shape depending on which of the cranial sutures are affected 	An abnormal feeling or disappearing "soft spot" (fontanel) on your baby's skull 	Slow or no growth of the head as your baby grows 	Development of a raised, hard ridge along affected sutures 	Increased pressure within the skull (intracranial pressure) 	|
Crohn's disease|Diarrhea. Diarrhea is a common problem for people with Crohn's disease. Intensified intestinal cramping also can contribute to loose stools.	Fever and fatigue. Many people with Crohn's disease experience a low-grade fever, likely due to inflammation or infection. You may also feel tired or have low energy.	Abdominal pain and cramping. Inflammation and ulceration can affect the normal movement of contents through your digestive tract and may lead to pain and cramping. You may experience anything from slight discomfort to severe pain, including nausea and vomiting.	Blood in your stool. You might notice bright red blood in the toilet bowl or darker blood mixed with your stool. You can also have bleeding you don't see (occult blood).	Mouth sores. You may have ulcers in your mouth similar to canker sores.	Reduced appetite and weight loss. Abdominal pain and cramping and the inflammatory reaction in the wall of your bowel can affect both your appetite and your ability to digest and absorb food.	Perianal disease. You might have pain or drainage near or around the anus due to inflammation from a tunnel into the skin (fistula).	|Limit dairy products. Many people with inflammatory bowel disease find that problems such as diarrhea, abdominal pain and gas, improve by limiting or eliminating dairy products. You may be lactose intolerant — that is, your body can't digest the milk sugar (lactose) in dairy foods. Using an enzyme product such as Lactaid may help as well.	Try low-fat foods. If you have Crohn's disease of the small intestine, you may not be able to digest or absorb fat normally. Instead, fat passes through your intestine, making your diarrhea worse. Try avoiding butter, margarine, cream sauces and fried foods.	 Limit fiber, if it's a problem food. If you have inflammatory bowel disease, high-fiber foods, such as fresh fruits and vegetables and whole grains, may make your symptoms worse. If raw fruits and vegetables bother you, try steaming, baking or stewing them. In general, you may have more problems with foods in the cabbage family, such as broccoli and cauliflower, and nuts, seeds, corn and popcorn. You may be told to limit fiber or go on a low residue diet if you have a narrowing of your bowel (stricture). 	Avoid other problem foods. Spicy foods, alcohol, and caffeine may make your signs and symptoms worse.	
Cryptosporidium infection|Watery diarrhea	Dehydration	Lack of appetite	Weight loss	Stomach cramps or pain	Fever	Nausea	Vomiting	|
Cushing syndrome|Weight gain and fatty tissue deposits, particularly around the midsection and upper back, in the face (moon face), and between the shoulders (buffalo hump)	Pink or purple stretch marks (striae) on the skin of the abdomen, thighs, breasts and arms	Thinning, fragile skin that bruises easily	Slow healing of cuts, insect bites and infections	Acne	|Increase activities slowly. You may be in such a hurry to get your old self back that you push yourself too hard too fast, but your weakened muscles need a slower approach. Work up to a reasonable level of exercise or activity that feels comfortable without overdoing it. You'll improve little by little, and your persistence will be rewarded.	Eat sensibly. Nutritious, wholesome foods provide a good source of fuel for your recovering body and can help you lose the extra pounds that you gained from Cushing syndrome. Make sure you're getting enough calcium and vitamin D. Taken together, they help your body absorb calcium, which can help strengthen your bones, counteracting the bone density loss that often occurs with Cushing syndrome.	Monitor your mental health. Depression can be a side effect of Cushing syndrome, but it can also persist or develop after treatment begins. Don't ignore your depression or wait it out. Seek help promptly from your doctor or a therapist if you're depressed, overwhelmed or having difficulty coping during your recovery.	Gently soothe aches and pains. Hot baths, massages and low-impact exercises, such as water aerobics and tai chi, can help alleviate some of the muscle and joint pain that accompanies Cushing syndrome recovery.	Exercise your brain. If you're recovering from any cognitive difficulties as a result of Cushing syndrome, mental exercises, such as math problems and crossword puzzles, may improve your brain function.	
Cyclic vomiting syndrome|Severe vomiting that occurs several times per hour and lasts less than one week 	Three or more separate episodes of vomiting with no apparent cause in the past year 	|Treatments and drugs	Alternative medicine	
Cyclospora infection|Frequent, watery diarrhea	Bouts of diarrhea alternating with bouts of constipation	Loss of appetite and weight loss	Bloating, flatulence and burping	Stomach cramps	Nausea and vomiting	Muscle aches	Fever	Fatigue — this symptom may last long after the active infection has gotten better	General feeling of unwellness (malaise)	|Treatments and drugs	Prevention	
Cyclothymia (cyclothymic disorder)|An exaggerated feeling of happiness or well-being (euphoria)	Extreme optimism	Inflated self-esteem	Talking more than usual	Poor judgment that can result in risky behavior or unwise choices	Racing thoughts	Irritable or agitated behavior	Excessive physical activity	Increased drive to perform or achieve goals (sexual, work related or social)	Decreased need for sleep	Tendency to be easily distracted	Inability to concentrate	|Take your medications as directed. Even if you're feeling well, resist any temptation to skip your medications. If you stop, cyclothymia symptoms are likely to come back.	Pay attention to warning signs. You may have identified a pattern to your cyclothymia symptoms and what triggers them. Follow your treatment plan if you feel you're facing a period of high or low symptoms. Involve family members or friends in watching for warning signs. Addressing symptoms early may keep them from getting worse.	Quit drinking or using recreational drugs. Alcohol and recreational drugs may trigger mood changes. Talk to your doctor if you have trouble quitting on your own.	Check first before taking other medications. Call the doctor who's treating you for cyclothymia before you take over-the-counter medications or medications prescribed by another doctor. Sometimes other medications trigger periods of cyclothymia or may interfere with medications you're already taking.	Keep a record. Track your moods, daily routines and significant life events. These records may help you and your mental health provider understand the effect of treatments and identify thinking patterns and behaviors associated with cyclothymia symptoms.	Get regular physical activity and exercise. Moderate, regular physical activity and exercise can help steady your mood. Working out releases brain chemicals that make you feel good (endorphins), can help you sleep and has a number of other benefits. Check with your doctor before starting any exercise program.	Get plenty of sleep. Don't stay up all night. Instead, get plenty of sleep. Sleeping enough is an important part of managing your mood. If you have trouble sleeping, talk to your doctor or mental health provider about what you can do.	
Cystic fibrosis|A persistent cough that produces thick (sputum) mucus	Wheezing	Breathlessness	Exercise intolerance	Repeated lung infections	Inflamed nasal passages or a stuffy nose	|Antacids	Supplemental high-calorie nutrition	Special fat-soluble vitamins	Extra fiber to prevent intestinal blockage	Extra salt, especially during hot weather	
Cystitis|A strong, persistent urge to urinate	A burning sensation when urinating	Passing frequent, small amounts of urine	Blood in the urine (hematuria)	Passing cloudy or strong-smelling urine	Pelvic discomfort	A feeling of pressure in the lower abdomen	Low-grade fever	|Use a heating pad. A heating pad placed on your lower abdomen can soothe and possibly minimize feelings of bladder pressure or pain.	Stay hydrated. Drink plenty of fluids to keep yourself hydrated. Avoid coffee, alcohol, soft drinks with caffeine and citrus juices — as well as spicy foods — until your infection clears. These items can irritate the bladder and aggravate a frequent or urgent need to urinate.	Take a sitz bath. Soak in a bathtub of warm water (sitz bath) for 15 to 20 minutes to help relieve pain or discomfort.	
Cytomegalovirus (CMV) infection|Yellow skin and eyes (jaundice)	Purple skin splotches or a rash or both	Small size at birth (or low birth weight)	Enlarged spleen	Enlarged and poorly functioning liver	Pneumonia	Seizures	|
Dandruff||Learn to manage stress. Stress affects your overall health, making you susceptible to a number of conditions and diseases. It can even help trigger dandruff or worsen existing symptoms.	Shampoo often. If you tend to have an oily scalp, daily shampooing may help prevent dandruff.	Cut back on styling products. Hair sprays, styling gels, mousses and hair waxes can all build up on your hair and scalp, making them oilier.	Eat a healthy diet. A diet that provides enough zinc, B vitamins and certain types of fats may help prevent dandruff.	Get a little sun. Sunlight may be good for dandruff. But because exposure to ultraviolet light damages your skin and increases your risk of skin cancer, don't sunbathe. Instead, just spend a little time outdoors. And be sure to wear sunscreen on your face and body.	
Ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS)|A breast lump	Bloody nipple discharge	|
De Quervain's tenosynovitis|Pain near the base of your thumb	Swelling near the base of your thumb	Difficulty moving your thumb and wrist when you're doing something that involves grasping or pinching	A "sticking" or "stop-and-go" sensation in your thumb when moving it	|Avoid moving your wrists the same way repeatedly.	Wear a brace or splint if suggested by your doctor.	Follow through with recommended exercises.	Note activity that causes pain, swelling or numbness in your thumb and wrist, try to avoid it, and share that information with your doctor.	
Dry eyes|A stinging, burning or scratchy sensation in your eyes	Stringy mucus in or around your eyes	Sensitivity to light	Eye redness	A sensation of having something in your eyes	Difficulty wearing contact lenses	Difficulty with nighttime driving	Watery eyes, which is the body's response to the irritation of dry eyes	Blurred vision or eye fatigue	|Preservative vs. nonpreservative drops. Preservatives are added to some eyedrops to prolong shelf life. You can use eyedrops with preservatives up to four times a day. But using the preservative drops more often can cause eye irritation. Nonpreservative eyedrops come in packages that contain multiple single-use vials. After you use a vial, you throw it away. If you rely on eyedrops more than four times a day, nonpreservative drops are safe.	Drops vs. ointments. Lubricating eye ointments coat your eyes, providing longer lasting relief from dry eyes. But these products are thicker than eyedrops and can cloud your vision. For this reason, ointments are best used just before bedtime. Eyedrops can be used at any time and won't interfere with your vision.	Drops that reduce redness. It's best to avoid these as your solution for dry eyes, as prolonged use can cause irritation.	
Deep vein thrombosis|Swelling in the affected leg. Rarely, there may be swelling in both legs.	Pain in your leg. The pain often starts in your calf and can feel like cramping or a soreness.	|Check in with your doctor regularly to see if your medication or treatments need to be modified. If you're taking warfarin (Coumadin, Jantoven), you'll need a blood test to see how well your blood is clotting.	Take your blood thinners as directed. If you've had DVT, you'll be on blood thinners for at least three to six months.	Watch how much vitamin K you're eating if you are taking warfarin. Vitamin K can affect how warfarin works. Green leafy vegetables are high in vitamin K. Check with your doctor or a dietitian about your diet if you're taking warfarin.	Be on the lookout for excessive bleeding, which can be a side effect of taking medications such as blood thinners. Talk to your doctor about activities that could cause you to bruise or get cut, as even a minor injury could become serious if you're taking blood thinners.	Move. If you've been on bed rest, because of surgery or other factors, the sooner you get moving, the less likely blood clots will develop.	Wear compression stockings to help prevent blood clots in the legs if your doctor recommends them.	
Dehydration|Dry, sticky mouth	Sleepiness or tiredness — children are likely to be less active than usual	Thirst	Decreased urine output	No wet diapers for three hours for infants	Few or no tears when crying	Dry skin	Headache	Constipation	Dizziness or lightheadedness	|
Delayed ejaculation|Lifelong vs. acquired. With lifelong delayed ejaculation, the problem is present from the time a male reaches sexual maturity. Acquired delayed ejaculation occurs after a period of normal sexual functioning.	Generalized vs. situational. Generalized delayed ejaculation isn't limited to certain sex partners or certain kinds of stimulation. Situational delayed ejaculation occurs only under certain circumstances.	|
Delirium|An inability to stay focused on a topic or to switch topics	Getting stuck on an idea rather than responding to questions or conversation	Being easily distracted by unimportant things	Being withdrawn, with little or no activity or little response to the environment	|
Dementia|Memory loss	Difficulty communicating or finding words	Difficulty with complex tasks	Difficulty with planning and organizing	Difficulty with coordination and motor functions	Problems with disorientation, such as getting lost	|Enhance communication. When talking with your loved one, maintain eye contact. Speak slowly in simple sentences, and don't rush the response. Present only one idea or instruction at a time. Use gestures and cues, such as pointing to objects.	 Encourage exercise. Exercise benefits everyone, including people with dementia. The main benefits of exercise include improved strength and cardiovascular health. Some research also shows physical activity may slow the progression of impaired thinking (cognitive) function in people with dementia. Exercise can also lessen symptoms of depression, help retain motor skills and create a calming effect. 	Encourage participation in games and thinking activities. Participating in games, crossword puzzles and other activities in which people are using thinking (cognitive) skills may help slow mental decline in people with dementia.	 Establish a nighttime ritual. Behavior is often worse at night. Try to establish going-to-bed rituals that are calming and away from the noise of television, meal cleanup and active family members. Leave night lights on to prevent disorientation. Limiting caffeine during the day, discouraging daytime napping and offering opportunities for exercise during the day may help prevent nighttime restlessness. 	Encourage keeping a calendar. Keeping a reminder calendar may help your loved one remember upcoming events, daily activities and medication schedules. Consider sharing a calendar with your loved one.	Plan for the future. Develop a plan with your loved one that identifies goals for care in the future. Several support groups, legal advisers, family members and others can help you. You'll need to consider financial and legal issues, safety and daily living concerns, and long-term care options.	
Dengue fever|Fever, as high as 106 F (41 C)	Headaches	Muscle, bone and joint pain	Pain behind your eyes	|
Dissociative disorders|Memory loss (amnesia) of certain time periods, events and people	Mental health problems, such as depression, anxiety, and suicidal thoughts and attempts	A sense of being detached from yourself 	A perception of the people and things around you as distorted and unreal	A blurred sense of identity	Significant stress or problems in your relationships, work or other important areas of your life	|
Depersonalization-derealization disorder|Feelings that you're an outside observer of your thoughts, feelings, your body or parts of your body, perhaps as if you were floating in air above yourself	Feeling like a robot or that you're not in control of your speech or movements	The sense that your body, legs or arms appear distorted, enlarged or shrunken, or that your head is wrapped in cotton	Emotional or physical numbness of your senses or responses to the world around you	A sense that your memories lack emotion, and that they may or may not be your own memories	|
Depression|Feelings of sadness, tearfulness, emptiness or hopelessness	Angry outbursts, irritability or frustration, even over small matters	Loss of interest or pleasure in most or all normal activities, such as sex, hobbies or sports	Sleep disturbances, including insomnia or sleeping too much	Tiredness and lack of energy, so even small tasks take extra effort	Changes in appetite — often reduced appetite and weight loss, but increased cravings for food and weight gain in some people	Anxiety, agitation or restlessness	Slowed thinking, speaking or body movements	Feelings of worthlessness or guilt, fixating on past failures or blaming yourself for things that aren't your responsibility	Trouble thinking, concentrating, making decisions and remembering things	Frequent or recurrent thoughts of death, suicidal thoughts, suicide attempts or suicide	Unexplained physical problems, such as back pain or headaches	|Stick to your treatment plan. Don't skip psychotherapy sessions or appointments. Even if you're feeling well, don't skip your medications. If you stop, depression symptoms may come back, and you could also experience withdrawal-like symptoms.	Learn about depression. Education about your condition can empower you and motivate you to stick to your treatment plan. Encourage your family to learn about depression to help them understand and support you.	Pay attention to warning signs. Work with your doctor or therapist to learn what might trigger your depression symptoms. Make a plan so that you know what to do if your symptoms get worse. Contact your doctor or therapist if you notice any changes in symptoms or how you feel. Ask relatives or friends to help watch for warning signs.	Avoid alcohol and recreational drugs. It may seem like alcohol or drugs lessen depression symptoms, but in the long run they generally worsen symptoms and make depression harder to treat. Talk with your doctor or therapist if you need help with alcohol or substance use.	Take care of yourself. Eat healthy, be physically active and get plenty of sleep. Consider walking, jogging, swimming, gardening or another activity that you enjoy. Sleeping well is important for both your physical and mental well-being. If you're having trouble sleeping, talk to your doctor about what you can do.	
Dermatitis|Atopic dermatitis (eczema). Usually beginning in infancy, this red, itchy rash most commonly occurs where the skin flexes — inside the elbows, behind the knees and the front of the neck. When scratched, the rash can leak fluid and crust over. People with atopic dermatitis may experience improvement and then flare-ups.	Contact dermatitis. This rash occurs on areas of the body that have come into contact with substances that either irritate the skin or cause an allergic reaction, such as poison ivy. The red rash may burn, sting or itch. Blisters may develop.	Seborrheic dermatitis. This condition causes scaly patches, red skin and stubborn dandruff. It usually affects oily areas of the body, such as the face, upper chest and back. It can be a long-term condition with periods of remission and flare-ups. In infants, this disorder is known as cradle cap.	|Use nonprescription anti-inflammation and anti-itch products. Over-the-counter hydrocortisone cream or calamine lotion can temporarily relieve inflammation and itching. Oral antihistamines, such as diphenhydramine (Benadryl, others), may be helpful if itching is severe. Diphenhydramine may cause drowsiness and slowing of the urinary stream.	Apply cool, wet compresses. Covering the affected area with bandages and dressings can help protect your skin and prevent scratching.	Take a comfortably warm bath. Sprinkle your bath water with uncooked oatmeal or colloidal oatmeal — a finely ground oatmeal that's made for the bathtub. Soak for 5 to 10 minutes, pat dry, and apply moisturizer.	Take a bleach bath. This may help people with severe atopic dermatitis by decreasing the bacteria on the skin. Add 1/2 cup (about 118 milliliters) of household bleach, not concentrated bleach, to a 40-gallon (about 151-liter) bathtub filled with warm water. Measures are for a U.S. standard-sized tub filled to the overflow drainage holes.	Avoid rubbing and scratching. Cover the itchy area with a dressing if you can't keep from scratching it. Trim nails and wear gloves at night.	Wear cotton clothing. Smooth-textured cotton clothing can help you avoid irritating the affected area.	Choose mild laundry detergent. Because your clothes, sheets and towels touch your skin, choose mild, unscented laundry products. Avoid fabric softeners.	Moisturize your skin. Routinely using moisturizers can reduce the severity of atopic dermatitis. For mild forms of the condition, moisturizer may be the main form of treatment.	Avoid irritants. For contact dermatitis especially, try to minimize contact with the substance that caused your rash.	Use stress management techniques. Emotional stressors can cause some types of dermatitis to flare up. Techniques such as relaxation or biofeedback may help.	
Dermatographia|Raised red lines	Swelling	Inflammation	Hive-like welts	Itching	|
Dermatomyositis|Skin changes. A violet-colored or dusky red rash develops, most commonly on your face and eyelids and on areas around your nails, knuckles, elbows, knees, chest and back. The rash, which can be patchy with bluish-purple discolorations, is often the first sign of dermatomyositis.	Muscle weakness. Progressive muscle weakness involves the muscles closest to the trunk, such as those in your hips, thighs, shoulders, upper arms and neck. The weakness affects both the left and right sides of your body, and tends to gradually worsen.	|Treatments and drugs	Coping and support	
Deviated septum|Obstruction of one or both nostrils. This obstruction can make it difficult to breathe through the nostril or nostrils. This may be more noticeable when you have a cold (upper respiratory tract infection) or allergies that can cause your nasal passages to swell and narrow.	Nosebleeds. The surface of your nasal septum may become dry, increasing your risk of nosebleeds.	Facial pain. Though there is some debate about the possible nasal causes of facial pain, a severe deviated septum that impacts the inside nasal wall, when on the same side as one-sided facial pain, is sometimes considered a possible cause.	Noisy breathing during sleep. This can occur in infants and young children with a deviated septum or with swelling of the intranasal tissues.	Awareness of the nasal cycle. It is normal for the nose to alternate being obstructed on one side, then changing to being obstructed on the other. This is called the nasal cycle. The nasal cycle is a normal phenomenon, but being aware of the nasal cycle is unusual and can be an indication that there is an abnormal amount of nasal obstruction.	Preference for sleeping on a particular side. Some people may prefer to sleep on a particular side in order to optimize breathing through the nose at night. This can be due to a deviated septum that narrows one nasal passage.	|
Diabetes|Increased thirst	Frequent urination	Extreme hunger	Unexplained weight loss	Presence of ketones in the urine (ketones are a byproduct of the breakdown of muscle and fat that happens when there's not enough available insulin)	Fatigue	Irritability	Blurred vision	Slow-healing sores	Frequent infections, such as gums or skin infections and vaginal infections	|Make a commitment to managing your diabetes. Learn all you can about diabetes. Establish a relationship with a diabetes educator, and ask your diabetes treatment team for help when you need it.	Choose healthy foods and maintain a healthy weight. Losing just 7 percent of your body weight if you're overweight can make a significant difference in your blood sugar control. A healthy diet is one with plenty of fruits, vegetables, whole grains and legumes, with a limited amount of saturated fat.	Make physical activity part of your daily routine. Regular exercise can help prevent prediabetes and type 2 diabetes, and it can help those who already have diabetes to maintain better blood sugar control. Thirty minutes of moderate exercise — such as brisk walking — most days of the week is recommended. A combination of exercises — aerobic exercises, such as walking or dancing on most days, combined with resistance training, such as weightlifting or yoga twice a week — often helps control blood sugar more effectively than does either type of exercise alone.	
Diabetes insipidus|Extreme thirst 	Excretion of an excessive amount of diluted urine 	|Prevent dehydration. As long as you take your medication and have access to water when the medication's effects wear off, you'll prevent serious problems. Plan ahead by carrying water with you wherever you go, and keep a supply of medication in your travel bag, at work or at school. 	Wear a medical alert bracelet or carry a medical alert card in your wallet. If you have a medical emergency, a health care professional will recognize immediately your need for special treatment. 	
Diabetic coma|Increased thirst	Frequent urination	Fatigue	Nausea and vomiting	Shortness of breath	Stomach pain	Fruity breath odor	A very dry mouth	A rapid heartbeat	|
Diabetic hyperosmolar syndrome|Blood sugar level of 600 milligrams per deciliter (mg/dL) or 33.3 millimoles per liter (mmol/L) or higher	Excessive thirst	Dry mouth	Increased urination	Warm, dry skin 	Fever	Drowsiness, confusion	Hallucinations	Vision loss	Convulsions	Coma	|
Diabetic hypoglycemia|Shakiness	Dizziness	Sweating	Hunger	Irritability or moodiness	Anxiety or nervousness	Headache	|
Diabetic ketoacidosis|Excessive thirst	Frequent urination	Nausea and vomiting	Abdominal pain	Weakness or fatigue	Shortness of breath	Fruity-scented breath	Confusion	|
Diabetic neuropathy|Numbness or reduced ability to feel pain or temperature changes	A tingling or burning sensation	Sharp pains or cramps	Increased sensitivity to touch — for some people, even the weight of a bed sheet can be agonizing	Muscle weakness	Loss of reflexes, especially in the ankle	Loss of balance and coordination	Serious foot problems, such as ulcers, infections, deformities, and bone and joint pain	|Keep your blood pressure under control. People with diabetes are more likely to have high blood pressure than are people who don't have diabetes. Having both high blood pressure and diabetes greatly increases your risk of complications because both damage your blood vessels and reduce blood flow. Try to keep your blood pressure in the range your doctor recommends, and be sure to have it checked at every office visit.	Make healthy food choices. Eat a balanced diet that includes a variety of healthy foods — especially fruits, vegetables and whole grains — and limit portion sizes to help achieve or maintain a healthy weight.	 Be active every day. Daily activity protects your heart and improves blood flow. It also plays a major role in keeping your blood sugar and blood pressure under control. The American Diabetes Association generally recommends about 30 minutes of moderate exercise a day at least five times a week. If you have severe neuropathy and decreased sensation in your legs, your doctor may recommend that you participate in non-weight-bearing activities, such as bicycling or swimming. 	Stop smoking. If you have diabetes and use tobacco in any form, you're more likely than are nonsmokers with diabetes to die of heart attack or stroke. And you're more likely to develop circulation problems in your feet. If you use tobacco, talk to your doctor about finding ways to quit.	
Diabetic retinopathy|Spots or dark strings floating in your vision (floaters)	Blurred vision	Fluctuating vision	Impaired color vision	Dark or empty areas in your vision	Vision loss	|
Diaper rash|Skin signs. Diaper rash is marked by red, tender-looking skin in the diaper region — buttocks, thighs and genitals.	Changes in your baby's disposition. You may notice your baby seems more uncomfortable than usual, especially during diaper changes. A baby with a diaper rash often fusses or cries when the diaper area is washed or touched.	| Keeping diaper area clean and dry. The best way to keep your baby's diaper area clean and dry is by changing diapers immediately after they are wet or soiled. Until the rash is better, this may mean getting up during the night to change the diaper. After you've gently cleaned and dried the skin, apply a cream, paste or ointment. Certain products, such as zinc oxide and petroleum jelly, work well to protect the skin from moisture. Don't try to scrub off this protective layer completely at the next diaper change, as that could hurt the skin more. If you do want to remove it, try using mineral oil on a cotton ball. 	Increasing airflow. To aid the healing of diaper rash, do what you can to increase air exposure to the diaper region. These tips may help:	
Diarrhea|Frequent, loose, watery stools 	Abdominal cramps 	Abdominal pain 	Fever 	Blood in the stool 	Bloating 	|Drink plenty of clear liquids, including water, broths and juices, every day. Avoid caffeine and alcohol. 	Add semisolid and low-fiber foods gradually as your bowel movements return to normal. Try soda crackers, toast, eggs, rice or chicken. 	Avoid certain foods such as dairy products, fatty foods, high-fiber foods or highly seasoned foods for a few days. 	 Ask about anti-diarrheal medications. Over-the-counter (OTC) anti-diarrheal medications, such as loperamide (Imodium A-D) and bismuth subsalicylate (Pepto-Bismol), may help reduce the number of watery bowel movements you experience. Certain medical conditions and infections — bacterial and parasitic — may be made worse by these OTC medications because they prevent your body from getting rid of what's causing the diarrhea. Also, these drugs aren't always safe for children. Check with your doctor before taking these medications or giving these medications to a child. 	Consider probiotics. Probiotics contain strains of living bacteria that are similar to the healthy bacteria normally found in your digestive system. Probiotics may boost the number of healthy bacteria present to fight germs in your digestive tract. Probiotic supplements are available. Beneficial bacteria may also be found in yogurt and cheese. 	
Diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis (DISH)|Stiffness. Stiffness may be most noticeable in the morning.	Pain. You may feel pain in your back or in other affected areas, such as your shoulder, elbow, knee or heel.	Loss of range of motion. You may notice this most when stretching side to side.	Difficulty swallowing or a hoarse voice. You may experience these if you have DISH in your neck.	|Exercise regularly. Regular aerobic exercise, such as walking or swimming, can increase your endurance, keep your body more nimble and help you cope with DISH. Talk with your doctor before starting an exercise program.	Achieve and maintain a desirable weight. Since obesity is associated with DISH, losing weight may help keep the disease from progressing and lower your risk of complications.	Apply heat. Use a heating pad on areas of your body that are affected by diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis to reduce pain. Set the heating pad at a low setting to reduce the risk of burns.	
DiGeorge syndrome|Bluish skin due to poor circulation of oxygen-rich blood (cyanosis) as a result of a heart defect	Breathing problems	Twitching or spasms around the mouth, hands, arms or throat	Frequent infections	Certain facial features, such as an underdeveloped chin, low-set ears, wide-set eyes or a narrow groove in the upper lip	A gap in the roof of the mouth (cleft palate) or other problems with the palate	Delayed growth	Difficulty feeding and gastrointestinal problems	Failure to gain weight	Poor muscle tone	Delayed development, such as delays in rolling over, sitting up or other infant milestones	Delayed speech development	Learning delays or difficulties and behavior problems	|
Dilated cardiomyopathy|Fatigue	Shortness of breath (dyspnea) when you're active or lying down	Reduced ability to exercise	Swelling (edema) in your legs, ankles and feet	Swelling of your abdomen (ascites)	|Exercise. Talk to your doctor about what activities would be safe and beneficial for you. In general, competitive sports aren't recommended because they can increase the risk of the heart stopping and causing sudden death.	Quit smoking. Your doctor can give you advice on what methods can help you stop.	Don't use illegal drugs or drink alcohol excessively. Using cocaine or other illegal drugs can strain your heart. Before you drink alcohol, ask your doctor for advice.	Maintain a healthy weight. Extra weight makes the heart work harder. Lose weight if you're overweight or obese.	Eat a heart-healthy diet. Eating whole grains and a variety of fruits and vegetables, and limiting salt, added sugar, and cholesterol and saturated and trans fats is good for your heart. Ask your doctor for a referral to a dietitian if you need help planning your diet.	
Diphtheria|A thick, gray membrane covering your throat and tonsils	A sore throat and hoarseness	Swollen glands (enlarged lymph nodes) in your neck	Difficulty breathing or rapid breathing	Nasal discharge	Fever and chills	Malaise	|Prevention	
Dislocated elbow|Extreme pain	Obvious distortion of the joint	|
Dislocated shoulder|A visibly deformed or out-of-place shoulder	Swelling or bruising	Intense pain	Inability to move the joint	|Rest your shoulder. Don't repeat the specific action that caused your shoulder to dislocate, and try to avoid painful movements. Limit heavy lifting or overhead activity until your shoulder feels better.	 Apply ice then heat. Putting ice on your shoulder helps reduce inflammation and pain. Use a cold pack, a bag of frozen vegetables or a towel filled with ice cubes for 15 to 20 minutes at a time. Do this every couple of hours the first day or two. After two or three days, when the pain and inflammation have improved, hot packs or a heating pad may help relax tight and sore muscles. Limit heat applications to 20 minutes at a time. 	Take pain relievers. Over-the-counter (OTC) medications, such as aspirin, ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin IB, others), naproxen sodium (Aleve) or acetaminophen (Tylenol, others), may help relieve pain. Follow label directions and stop taking the drugs when the pain improves.	Maintain the range of motion of your shoulder. After one or two days, do some gentle exercises as directed by your doctor or physical therapist to help maintain your shoulder's range of motion. Inactivity can cause stiff joints. In addition, favoring your shoulder for a long period can lead to frozen shoulder, a condition in which your shoulder becomes so stiff you can barely move it.	
Dislocation|Visibly deformed or out of place	Swollen or discolored	Intensely painful	Immovable	|Rest your dislocated joint. Don't repeat the specific action that caused your injury, and try to avoid painful movements.	Apply ice and heat. Putting ice on your injured joint helps reduce inflammation and pain. Use a cold pack for 15 to 20 minutes at a time. For the first day or two, try to do this every couple of hours during the day. After about two or three days, when the pain and inflammation have improved, hot packs or a heating pad may help relax tightened and sore muscles. Limit heat applications to 20 minutes at a time.	Take a pain reliever. Over-the-counter medications, such as ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin IB, others), naproxen (Aleve) or acetaminophen (Tylenol, others), may help relieve pain.	Maintain the range of motion in your joint. After one or two days, do some gentle exercises as directed by your doctor or physical therapist to help maintain range of motion in your injured joint. Total inactivity can cause stiff joints.	
Diverticulitis|Pain, which may be constant and persist for several days. Pain is usually felt in the lower left side of the abdomen, but may occur on the right, especially in people of Asian descent.	Nausea and vomiting.	Fever.	Abdominal tenderness.	Constipation or, less commonly, diarrhea.	|Exercise regularly. Exercise promotes normal bowel function and reduces pressure inside your colon. Try to exercise at least 30 minutes on most days.	Eat more fiber. High-fiber foods, such as fresh fruits and vegetables and whole grains, soften waste material and help it pass more quickly through your colon. This reduces pressure inside your digestive tract. However, it isn't clear whether a high-fiber diet decreases the risk of diverticulitis. Eating seeds and nuts isn't associated with developing diverticulitis.	Drink plenty of fluids. Fiber works by absorbing water and increasing the soft, bulky waste in your colon. But if you don't drink enough liquid to replace what's absorbed, fiber can be constipating.	
Dizziness|A false sense of motion or spinning (vertigo)	Lightheadedness or feeling faint	Unsteadiness or a loss of balance	A feeling of floating, wooziness or heavy-headedness	|Be aware of the possibility of losing your balance, which can lead to falling and serious injury.	Avoid moving suddenly and walk with a cane for stability, if needed.	Fall-proof your home by removing tripping hazards such as area rugs and exposed electrical cords. Use nonslip mats on your bath and shower floors. Use good lighting.	Sit or lie down immediately when you feel dizzy. Lie still with your eyes closed in a darkened room if you're experiencing a severe episode of vertigo.	Avoid driving a car or operating heavy machinery if you experience frequent dizziness without warning.	Avoid using caffeine, alcohol, salt and tobacco. Excessive use of these substances can worsen your signs and symptoms.	Drink enough fluids, eat a healthy diet, get enough sleep and avoid stress.	If your dizziness is caused by a medication, talk with your doctor about discontinuing it or lowering the dose.	If your dizziness comes with nausea, try an over-the-counter (nonprescription) antihistamine, such as meclizine (Antivert) or one containing dimenhydrinate (Dramamine). These may cause drowsiness. Nondrowsy antihistamines aren't as effective.	If your dizziness is caused by overheating or dehydration, rest in a cool place and drink water or a sports drink (Gatorade, Powerade, others).	
Double uterus|Unusual pressure or cramping pain before or during a menstrual period 	Abnormal bleeding during a period, such as blood flow despite the use of a tampon 	|
Down syndrome|Flattened facial features	Small head	Short neck	Protruding tongue	Upward slanting eyes, unusual for the child's ethnic group	Unusually shaped or small ears	Poor muscle tone	Broad, short hands with a single crease in the palm	Relatively short fingers and small hands and feet	Excessive flexibility	Tiny white spots on the colored part (iris) of the eye called Brushfield spots	Short height	|
Dressler's syndrome|Chest pain	Fever	|
Drug addiction|Feeling that you have to use the drug regularly — this can be daily or even several times a day	Having intense urges for the drug	Over time, needing more of the drug to get the same effect	Making certain that you maintain a supply of the drug	Spending money on the drug, even though you can't afford it	Not meeting obligations and work responsibilities, or cutting back on social or recreational activities because of drug use	Doing things to get the drug that you normally wouldn't do, such as stealing	Driving or doing other risky activities when you're under the influence of the drug	Focusing more and more time and energy on getting and using the drug	Failing in your attempts to stop using the drug	Experiencing withdrawal symptoms when you attempt to stop taking the drug	|
Drug allergy|Skin rash	Hives	Itching	Fever	Swelling	Shortness of breath	Wheezing	Runny nose	Itchy, watery eyes	|
Dry mouth|Dryness in your mouth or throat	Saliva that seems thick and stringy	Bad breath	Difficulty chewing, speaking and swallowing	A changed sense of taste	Problems wearing dentures	More frequent tooth decay	Gum irritation and gum disease	|Sip water or sugar-free drinks or suck ice chips throughout the day to moisten your mouth, and drink water during meals to aid chewing and swallowing.	Chew sugar-free gum or suck on sugar-free hard candies. However, in some people, xylitol, which is often found in sugar-free gum or sugar-free candies, may cause diarrhea or cramps if consumed in large amounts.	Try over-the-counter saliva substitutes that contain carboxymethylcellulose (kahr-bok-see-meth-ul-SEL-u-lohs) or hydroxyethyl cellulose (hi-drok-see-ETH-ul SEL-u-lohs), such as Biotene Oral Balance.	Breathe through your nose, not your mouth. You may need to seek treatment for snoring that causes you to breathe through your mouth during the night.	Add moisture to the air at night with a room humidifier.	Moisturize your lips to soothe dry or cracked areas.	
Dry skin|A feeling of skin tightness, especially after showering, bathing or swimming	Skin that feels and looks rough	Itching (pruritus)	Slight to severe flaking, scaling or peeling	Fine lines or cracks	Gray, ashy skin in people with dark skin	Redness	Deep cracks that may bleed	| Moisturize. Moisturizers provide a seal over your skin to keep water from escaping. Apply moisturizer several times a day. Thicker moisturizers work best, such as over-the-counter brands Eucerin and Cetaphil. You may also want to use cosmetics that contain moisturizers. If your skin is extremely dry, you may want to apply an oil, such as baby oil, while your skin is still moist. Oil has more staying power than moisturizers do and prevents the evaporation of water from the surface of your skin. Another possibility is ointments that contain petroleum jelly (Vaseline, Aquaphor). However, these may feel greasy, so you might use them only at night. 	Use warm water and limit bath time. Long showers or baths and hot water remove oils from your skin. Limit your bath or shower to five to 10 minutes and use warm, not hot, water.	Avoid harsh, drying soaps. It's best to use cleansing creams or gentle skin cleansers and bath or shower gels with added moisturizers. Choose mild soaps that have added oils and fats. Avoid deodorant and antibacterial detergents, fragrance, and alcohol.	Apply moisturizers immediately after bathing. Gently pat your skin dry with a towel so that some moisture remains. Immediately moisturize your skin with an oil or cream to help trap water in the surface cells.	Use a humidifier. Hot, dry, indoor air can parch sensitive skin and worsen itching and flaking. A portable home humidifier or one attached to your furnace adds moisture to the air inside your home. Be sure to keep your humidifier clean to ward off bacteria and fungi.	Choose fabrics that are kind to your skin. Natural fibers, such as cotton and silk, allow your skin to breathe. But wool, although natural, can irritate even normal skin. Wash your clothes with detergents without dyes or perfumes, both of which can irritate your skin.	
Dry socket|Severe pain within a few days after a tooth extraction 	Partial or total loss of the blood clot at the tooth extraction site, which you may notice as an empty-looking (dry) socket 	Visible bone in the socket 	Pain that radiates from the socket to your ear, eye, temple or neck on the same side of your face as the extraction 	Bad breath or a foul odor coming from your mouth 	Unpleasant taste in your mouth 	Swollen lymph nodes around your jaw or neck 	Slight fever 	|Put cold packs on the outside of your face in the first 48 hours after extraction and warm packs after that, to help decrease pain and swelling 	Take pain medications as prescribed 	Avoid smoking or using tobacco products 	Drink plenty of clear liquids to remain hydrated and to prevent nausea that may be associated with some pain medications 	Rinse your mouth gently with warm salt water several times a day 	Brush your teeth gently around the dry socket area 	
Dumping syndrome|Nausea	Vomiting	Abdominal cramps	Diarrhea	Flushing	Dizziness, lightheadedness	Rapid heart rate	|Eat smaller meals. Try eating five or six small meals a day rather than three larger ones.	Avoid fluids with meals. Drink liquids only between meals. Avoid liquids for a half-hour before eating and a half-hour after eating.	 Change your diet. Eat more protein — meat, poultry, creamy peanut butter and fish — and complex carbohydrates — oatmeal and other whole-grain foods high in fiber. Limit high-sugar foods, such as candy, table sugar, syrup, sodas and juices. The natural sugar in dairy products (lactose) might worsen your symptoms. Try small amounts at first, or eliminate them if you think they're causing problems. You might want to see a registered dietitian for more advice about what to eat. 	Chew well. Chewing food thoroughly before you swallow can aid digestion.	Sit upright after eating. Don't lie down for 30 to 60 minutes after you eat.	Increase fiber intake. Psyllium, guar gum and pectin in food or supplements can delay the absorption of carbohydrates in the small intestine.	Check with your doctor about drinking alcohol.	Consume adequate vitamins, iron and calcium. These can sometimes become depleted following stomach surgery. Talk to your doctor or dietician about whether you need supplements.	
Dupuytren's contracture||Avoiding a tight grip on tools by building up the handles with pipe insulation or cushion tape	Using gloves with heavy padding during heavy grasping tasks	
Dust mite allergy|Sneezing 	Runny nose 	Itchy, red or watery eyes 	Nasal congestion 	Itchy nose, roof of mouth or throat 	Postnasal drip 	Cough 	Facial pressure and pain 	Swollen, blue-colored skin under your eyes 	In a child, frequent upward rubbing of the nose 	|Use allergen-proof bed covers. Cover your mattress and pillows in dustproof or allergen-blocking covers. These covers, made of tightly woven fabric, prevent dust mites from colonizing or escaping from the mattress or pillows. Encase box springs in allergen-proof covers. 	Wash bedding weekly. Wash all sheets, blankets, pillowcases and bedcovers in hot water that is at least 130 F (54.4 C) to kill dust mites and remove allergens. If bedding can't be washed hot, put the items in the dryer for at least 15 minutes at a temperature above 130 F (54.4 C) to kill the mites. Then wash and dry the bedding to remove allergens. Freezing nonwashable items for 24 hours also can kill dust mites, but this won't remove the allergens. 	Keep humidity low. Maintain a relative humidity below 50 percent in your home. A dehumidifier or air conditioner can help keep humidity low, and a hygrometer (available at hardware stores) can measure humidity levels. 	Choose bedding wisely. Avoid bedcovers that trap dust easily and are difficult to clean frequently. 	Buy washable stuffed toys. Wash them often in hot water and dry thoroughly. Also, keep stuffed toys off beds. 	Remove dust. Use a damp or oiled mop or rag rather than dry materials to clean up dust. This prevents dust from becoming airborne and resettling. 	Vacuum regularly. Vacuuming carpeting and upholstered furniture removes surface dust — but vacuuming isn't effective at removing most dust mites and dust mite allergens. Use a vacuum cleaner with a double-layered microfilter bag or a high-efficiency particulate air (HEPA) filter to help decrease house-dust emissions from the cleaner. If your allergies are severe, leave the area being vacuumed while someone else does the work. Stay out of the vacuumed room for about two hours after vacuuming. 	Cut clutter. If it collects dust, it also collects dust mites. Remove knickknacks, tabletop ornaments, books, magazines and newspapers from your bedroom. 	Remove carpeting and other dust mite habitats. Carpeting provides a comfortable habitat for dust mites. This is especially true if carpeting is over concrete, which holds moisture easily and provides a humid environment for mites. If possible, replace wall-to-wall bedroom carpeting with tile, wood, linoleum or vinyl flooring. Consider replacing other dust-collecting furnishings in bedrooms, such upholstered furniture, nonwashable curtains and horizontal blinds. 	Install a high efficiency media filter in your furnace and air conditioning unit. Look for a filter with a Minimum Efficiency Reporting Value (MERV) of 11 or 12 and leave the fan on to create a whole house air filter. Be sure to change the filter every three months. 	
Dwarfism|An average-size trunk	Short arms and legs, with particularly short upper arms and upper legs	Short fingers, often with a wide separation between the middle and ring fingers	Limited mobility at the elbows	A disproportionately large head, with a prominent forehead and a flattened bridge of the nose	Progressive development of bowed legs	Progressive development of swayed lower back	An adult height around 4 feet (122 cm)	|Car seats. Use an infant car seat with firm back and neck supports. Continue using a car seat in the rear-facing direction to the highest weight and height possible (and beyond the recommended age limit).	Infant carriers and play equipment. Avoid infant devices — such as swings, umbrella strollers, carrying slings, jumper seats and backpack carriers — that don't support the neck or that curve the back into a C shape.	Adequate support. Support your child's head and neck when he or she is seated.	Complications. Monitor your child for signs of complications, such as ear infection or sleep apnea.	Posture. Promote good posture by providing a pillow for the lower back and a footstool when your child is sitting.	Healthy diet. Begin healthy eating habits early to avoid later problems with weight gain.	Healthy activities. Encourage participation in appropriate recreational activities, such as swimming or bicycling, but avoid sports that involve collision or impact, such as football, diving or gymnastics.	
Dysarthria|Slurred speech	Slow speech	Inability to speak louder than a whisper or speaking too loudly	Rapid speech that is difficult to understand	Nasal, raspy or strained voice	Uneven or abnormal speech rhythm	Uneven speech volume	Monotone speech	Difficulty moving your tongue or facial muscles	|
Dyshidrosis||Compresses. Wet, cool compresses may help reduce itching. 	Antihistamines. Over-the-counter antihistamine medications such as diphenhydramine (Benadryl) or loratadine (Claritin, Alavert, others) can help relieve itching. 	Witch hazel. Soaking the affected areas in witch hazel may speed healing. 	
Dyslexia|Late talking	Learning new words slowly	Difficulty learning nursery rhymes	Difficulty playing rhyming games	|
Dysphagia|Having pain while swallowing (odynophagia)	Being unable to swallow	Having the sensation of food getting stuck in your throat or chest or behind your breastbone (sternum)	Drooling	Being hoarse	Bringing food back up (regurgitation)	Having frequent heartburn	Having food or stomach acid back up into your throat	Unexpectedly losing weight	Coughing or gagging when swallowing	Having to cut food into smaller pieces or avoiding certain foods because of trouble swallowing	|Changing your eating habits. Try eating smaller, more-frequent meals. Be sure to cut your food into smaller pieces and eat more slowly.	Trying foods with different textures to see if some cause you more trouble. Thin liquids, such as coffee and juice, are a problem for some people, and sticky foods, such as peanut butter or caramel, can make swallowing difficult. Avoid foods that cause you trouble.	Avoiding alcohol, tobacco and caffeine. These can make heartburn worse.	
E. coli|Diarrhea, which may range from mild and watery to severe and bloody	Abdominal cramping, pain or tenderness	Nausea and vomiting, in some people	|Clear liquids. Drink plenty of clear liquids, including water, clear sodas and broths, gelatin, and juices. Avoid apple and pear juices, caffeine, and alcohol.	Add foods gradually. When you start feeling better, stick to low-fiber foods at first. Try soda crackers, toast, eggs or rice.	Avoid certain foods. Dairy products, fatty foods, high-fiber foods or highly seasoned foods can make symptoms worse.	
Ear infection (middle ear)|Ear pain, especially when lying down 	Tugging or pulling at an ear 	Difficulty sleeping 	Crying more than usual 	Acting more irritable than usual 	Difficulty hearing or responding to sounds 	Loss of balance 	Fever of 100 F (38 C) or higher 	Drainage of fluid from the ear 	Headache 	Loss of appetite 	|
Earwax blockage|Earache	Feeling of fullness in the affected ear	Ringing or noises in the ear (tinnitus)	Decreased hearing in the affected ear	Dizziness	Cough	|Soften the wax. Use an eyedropper to apply a few drops of baby oil, mineral oil, glycerin or hydrogen peroxide in your ear canal.	Use warm water. After a day or two, when the wax is softened, use a rubber-bulb syringe to gently squirt warm water into your ear canal. Tilt your head and pull your outer ear up and back to straighten your ear canal. When finished irrigating, tip your head to the side to let the water drain out.	Dry your ear canal. When finished, gently dry your outer ear with a towel or hand-held dryer.	
Ebola virus and Marburg virus|Fever	Severe headache	Joint and muscle aches	Chills	Weakness	|
Ebstein's anomaly|Shortness of breath, especially with exertion	Fatigue	Heart palpitations or abnormal heart rhythms (arrhythmias)	A bluish discoloration of the lips and skin caused by low oxygen (cyanosis)	|
Ectopic pregnancy|Severe abdominal or pelvic pain accompanied by vaginal bleeding	Extreme lightheadedness or fainting	Shoulder pain	|
Erectile dysfunction|Trouble getting an erection	Trouble keeping an erection	Reduced sexual desire	|If you smoke, quit. If you have trouble quitting, get help. Try nicotine replacement, such as over-the-counter gum or lozenges, or ask your doctor about a prescription medication that can help you quit.	Lose excess pounds. Being overweight can cause — or worsen — erectile dysfunction.	Include physical activity in your daily routine. Exercise can help with underlying conditions that play a part in erectile dysfunction in a number of ways, including reducing stress, helping you lose weight and increasing blood flow.	Get treatment for alcohol or drug problems. Drinking too much or taking certain illegal drugs can worsen erectile dysfunction directly or by causing long-term health problems.	Work through relationship issues. Consider couples or marriage counseling if you're having trouble improving communication with your partner or working through problems on your own.	
Edema|Swelling or puffiness of the tissue directly under your skin	Stretched or shiny skin	Skin that retains a dimple after being pressed for several seconds	Increased abdominal size	|Movement. Moving and using the muscles in the part of your body affected by edema may help pump the excess fluid back to your heart. Ask your doctor about exercises you can do that may reduce swelling.	Elevation. Hold the swollen part of your body above the level of your heart several times a day. In some cases, elevating the affected body part while you sleep may be helpful.	Massage. Stroking the affected area toward your heart using firm, but not painful, pressure may help move the excess fluid out of that area. 	Compression. If one of your limbs is affected by edema, your doctor may recommend you wear compression stockings, sleeves or gloves. These garments keep pressure on your limbs to prevent fluid from collecting in the tissue.	Protection. Keep the affected area clean, moisturized and free from injury. Dry, cracked skin is more prone to scrapes, cuts and infection. Always wear protection on your feet if that's where the swelling typically occurs.	Reduce salt intake. Follow your doctor's suggestions about limiting how much salt you consume. Salt can increase fluid retention and worsen edema.	
Egg allergy|Skin inflammation or hives — the most common egg allergy reaction	Nasal congestion, runny nose and sneezing (allergic rhinitis)	Digestive symptoms, such as cramps, nausea and vomiting	Asthma signs and symptoms such as coughing, wheezing, chest tightness or shortness of breath	|
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome|Overly flexible joints. Because the connective tissue that holds joints together is looser, your joints can move far past the normal range of motion. Small joints are affected more than large joints. You might also be able to touch the tip of your nose with your tongue.	Stretchy skin. Weakened connective tissue allows your skin to stretch much more than usual. You may be able to pull a pinch of skin up away from your flesh, but it will snap right back into place when you let go. Your skin might also feel exceptionally soft and velvety.	Fragile skin. Damaged skin often doesn't heal well. For example, the stitches used to close a wound often will tear out and leave a gaping scar. These scars may look thin and crinkly.	|Choose sports wisely. Avoid contact sports, weightlifting and other activities that increase your risk of injury. Minimize stress on your hips, knees and ankles that can be caused by running, climbing stairs or step aerobics.	Rest your jaw. To protect your jaw joint, avoid chewing gum, hard rolls and ice. Take breaks during dental work to close your mouth.	Avoid certain musical instruments. To prevent a collapsed lung, avoid playing reeded wind or brass instruments. The violin or piano would be safer options and would take advantage of the increased flexibility of your hands.	
Ehrlichiosis|Mild fever	Headache	Chills	Muscle aches	Nausea	Vomiting	Diarrhea	Fatigue	Loss of appetite	Joint pain	Confusion	Rash	Cough	|Use tweezers if possible. Use a pair of flat-tipped tweezers or cover your hand with a tissue or glove to remove a tick. A tick's saliva and bodily fluids can carry the same bacterium that's found in its mouth and the bacterium can enter your body through cuts or mucous membranes in your skin.	 Remove the tick slowly. Grab the tick by its mouth parts where it has attached to your skin. Pull it up and out of your skin steadily and slowly without jerking or twisting it. If you pull too quickly or grab the tick by its body, the tick will likely separate, leaving the mouth parts in your skin. If the tick's mouth parts do break off in your skin, remove them with tweezers. Petroleum jelly and hot matches are not effective treatments for removing ticks or tick parts from your skin. These methods may make matters worse by triggering the tick to release more of its bodily fluids, and that could cause further infection. 	 Kill the tick. Once you have successfully removed the tick, kill it by placing it in a container with rubbing alcohol in it. Don't crush the tick in your hands or with your fingernails because the fluids it releases may contain infected bacteria. If you want to save the tick for testing in the event you become ill, put it in a plastic bag or a jar, date the container and place it in the freezer. 	Clean the bite site. Wash the bite site thoroughly with hand antiseptic or soap and water. And, thoroughly wash your hands.	 Monitor the bite site. In the following days and weeks, watch the bite site for a rash and pay close attention to any signs and symptoms that develop such as fever, muscle aches or joint pain. If you notice anything out of the ordinary, see your doctor. If possible, bring the tick with you to your appointment. 	
Emphysema|You're so short of breath, you can't climb stairs	Your lips or fingernails turn blue or gray with exertion	You're not mentally alert	|Stop smoking. This is the most important measure you can take for your overall health and the only one that might halt the progression of emphysema. Join a smoking cessation program if you need help giving up smoking. As much as possible, avoid secondhand smoke.	Avoid other respiratory irritants. These include fumes from paint and automobile exhaust, some cooking odors, certain perfumes, even burning candles and incense. Change furnace and air conditioner filters regularly to limit pollutants.	Exercise regularly. Try not to let your breathing problems keep you from getting regular exercise, which can significantly increase your lung capacity.	Protect yourself from cold air. Cold air can cause spasms of the bronchial passages, making it even more difficult to breathe. During cold weather, wear a soft scarf or a cold-air mask — available from a pharmacy — over your mouth and nose before going outside, to warm the air entering your lungs.	Prevent respiratory infections. Get pneumonia vaccinations as advised by your doctor. Also get an annual flu shot. Do your best to avoid direct contact with people who have a cold or the flu. If you have to mingle with large groups of people during cold and flu season, wear a face mask, wash your hands frequently and carry a small bottle of hand sanitizer to use when needed.	
Encephalitis|Headache	Fever	Aches in muscles or joints	Fatigue or weakness	|
Encopresis|Leakage of stool or liquid stool on your child's underwear. If the amount of leakage is large, you may misinterpret it as diarrhea.	Constipation with dry, hard stool.	Passage of large stool that clogs or almost clogs the toilet.	Avoidance of bowel movements.	Long periods of time between bowel movements, possibly as long as a week.	Lack of appetite.	Abdominal pain.	Repeated urinary tract infections.	|Focus on fiber. Feed your child a diet that includes plenty of fruits, vegetables and foods high in fiber, which can help form soft stools. Offer whole grains, which are brown — not white — in color.	Encourage drinking lots of water. Water helps keep stool from hardening. Encourage your child to drink plenty of water or other nondairy fluids.	Limit dairy products and fats. These can reduce bowel movements. But, dairy products also contain important nutrients, so ask your child's doctor how much dairy your child needs each day.	Arrange toilet time. Have your child sit on the toilet every day for 10 to 15 minutes after breakfast and supper. The bowel becomes more active about 30 minutes after eating, so this is a natural time for your child to try to pass stool. This applies only to children who are toilet trained and are at least 4 years old. Don't reward your child for passing stool or punish your child for not passing stool. Praise your child for sitting on the toilet as requested and trying.	Put a footstool near the toilet. This may make your child more comfortable, and changing the position of his or her legs can put more pressure on the abdomen, making a bowel movement easier.	Stick with the program for several months. The relapse rate for encopresis is high.	
Endocarditis|Fever and chills	A new or changed heart murmur — heart sounds made by blood rushing through your heart	Fatigue	Aching joints and muscles	Night sweats	Shortness of breath	Paleness	Persistent cough	Swelling in your feet, legs or abdomen	Unexplained weight loss	Blood in your urine (either visible or found in a doctor's viewing of your urine under a microscope)	Tenderness in your spleen — an infection-fighting abdominal organ on your left side, just below your rib cage	Osler's nodes — red, tender spots under the skin of your fingers	Petechiae (puh-TEE-key-ee) — tiny purple or red spots on the skin, whites of your eyes or inside your mouth	|Treatments and drugs	Prevention	
Endometrial cancer|Vaginal bleeding after menopause	Bleeding between periods	An abnormal, watery or blood-tinged discharge from your vagina	Pelvic pain	Pain during intercourse	|
Endometriosis|Painful periods (dysmenorrhea). Pelvic pain and cramping may begin before and extend several days into your period and may include lower back and abdominal pain. 	Pain with intercourse. Pain during or after sex is common with endometriosis. 	Pain with bowel movements or urination. You're most likely to experience these symptoms during your period. 	Excessive bleeding. You may experience occasional heavy periods (menorrhagia) or bleeding between periods (menometrorrhagia). 	Infertility. Endometriosis is first diagnosed in some women who are seeking treatment for infertility. 	Other symptoms. You may also experience fatigue, diarrhea, constipation, bloating or nausea, especially during menstrual periods. 	|Warm baths and a heating pad can help relax pelvic muscles, reducing cramping and pain. 	Over-the-counter nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), such as ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin IB, others) or naproxen (Aleve, others), can help ease painful menstrual cramps. 	Getting regular exercise may help improve symptoms. 	
Enlarged heart|Shortness of breath	Abnormal heart rhythm (arrhythmia)	Swelling (edema)	|Quit smoking.	Lose excess weight.	Limit salt in your diet.	Control diabetes.	Monitor your blood pressure.	Get modest exercise, after discussing with your doctor the most appropriate program of physical activity.	Avoid or eliminate alcohol and caffeine.	Try to sleep eight hours nightly.	
Enlarged liver|Pain in the upper right belly	Fatigue	Muscle aches (myalgia)	Nausea 	Poor appetite and weight loss	Yellowing of the skin and the whites of the eyes (jaundice)	|Bacteria, viruses and parasites 	Certain heart conditions	Several genetic diseases	Some types of leukemia and lymphoma	
Enlarged spleen|No symptoms in some cases 	Pain or fullness in the left upper abdomen that may spread to the left shoulder 	Feeling full without eating or after eating only a small amount — this can occur when an enlarged spleen presses on your stomach 	Anemia 	Fatigue 	Frequent infections 	Easy bleeding 	|Treatments and drugs	
Eosinophilic esophagitis|Difficulty swallowing (dysphagia)	Food impaction	Chest pain that is often centrally located and does not respond to antacids	Persistent heartburn	Upper abdominal pain	No response to gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) medication	Backflow of undigested food (regurgitation)	|Maintain a healthy weight. Excess pounds put pressure on your abdomen, pushing up your stomach and causing acid to back up into your esophagus. If your weight is at a healthy level, work to maintain it. If you are overweight or obese, work to slowly lose weight — no more than 1 or 2 pounds (0.5 to 1 kilogram) a week. Ask your doctor for help in devising a weight-loss strategy that will work for you.	Avoid foods and drinks that trigger heartburn. Common triggers, such as fatty or fried foods, tomato sauce, alcohol, chocolate, mint, garlic, onion, and caffeine, may make heartburn worse. Avoid foods you know will trigger your heartburn.	Elevate the head of your bed. If you regularly experience heartburn at night or while trying to sleep, put gravity to work for you. Place wood or cement blocks under the feet of your bed so that the head end is raised by 6 to 9 inches. If it's not possible to elevate your bed, insert a wedge between your mattress and box spring to elevate your body from the waist up.	
Epidermoid (sebaceous) cysts|A small, round bump under the skin, usually on the face, trunk or neck 	A tiny blackhead plugging the central opening of the cyst 	A thick, yellow, foul-smelling material that sometimes drains from the cyst 	Redness, swelling and tenderness in the area, if inflamed or infected 	|Not squeezing a cyst yourself	Placing a warm, moist cloth over the area to help the cyst drain and heal	
Epidermolysis bullosa|Fluid-filled blisters on the skin, especially on the hands and feet due to friction	Deformity or loss of fingernails and toenails	Internal blistering, including on the vocal cords, esophagus and upper airway	Skin thickening on the palms and the soles of the feet	Scalp blistering, scarring and hair loss (scarring alopecia)	Thin-appearing skin (atrophic scarring)	Tiny white skin bumps or pimples (milia)	Dental problems, such as tooth decay from poorly formed enamel	Difficulty swallowing (dysphagia)	|Wash your hands before touching your child's blisters or changing dressings.	If a soiled dressing sticks, don't pull it off. Soak the area in warm water until the dressing loosens.	
Epididymitis|A swollen, red or warm scrotum	Testicle pain and tenderness, usually on one side	Painful urination or an urgent or frequent need to urinate	Discharge from the penis	Painful intercourse or ejaculation	A lump on the testicle	Enlarged lymph nodes in the groin	Pain or discomfort in the lower abdomen or pelvic area	Blood in the semen	Less commonly, fever	|Rest in bed	Lie down so that your scrotum is elevated	Apply cold packs to your scrotum as tolerated	Wear an athletic supporter	Avoid lifting heavy objects	Avoid sexual intercourse until your infection has cleared	
Epiglottitis|Fever	Severe sore throat	Abnormal, high-pitched sound when breathing in (stridor)	Difficult and painful swallowing	Drooling	Anxious, restless behavior	Greater comfort when sitting up or leaning forward	|
Esophageal cancer|Difficulty swallowing (dysphagia)	Weight loss without trying	Chest pain, pressure or burning	Worsening indigestion or heartburn	Coughing or hoarseness	|
Esophageal spasms|Squeezing pain in your chest. The pain is often intense, and you might mistake it for heart pain (angina).	Difficulty swallowing, sometimes related to swallowing specific substances, such as red wine or extremely hot or cold liquids.	The feeling that an object is stuck in your throat.	The return of food and liquids back up your esophagus (regurgitation).	|Avoid your triggers. Make a list of foods and beverages that cause your esophageal spasms.	Choose food that is warm or cool. Let foods and drinks that are very hot or very cold sit for a bit before eating or drinking them.	Find ways to control stress. Esophageal spasms may be more common or more severe when you're stressed.	Suck a peppermint lozenge. Peppermint oil is a smooth-muscle relaxant and might help ease esophageal spasms. Place the peppermint lozenge under your tongue.	
Esophageal varices|Vomiting blood 	Black, tarry or bloody stools 	Shock (in severe case) 	|
Esophagitis|Difficult swallowing	Painful swallowing	Chest pain, particularly behind the breastbone, that occurs with eating	Swallowed food becoming stuck in the esophagus (food impaction)	Heartburn	Acid regurgitation	|Avoid foods that may increase reflux. Avoid eating excessive amounts of foods that you know worsen your symptoms of gastroesophageal reflux. These may include alcohol, caffeine, chocolate and mint-flavored foods.	Use good pill-taking habits. Always take a pill with plenty of water. Don't lie down for at least 30 minutes after taking a pill.	Lose weight. Talk to your doctor about an appropriate diet and exercise routine to help you lose weight and maintain a healthy weight.	If you smoke, quit. Talk to your doctor if you need help ending a smoking habit.	Avoid certain medications. Avoid some pain relievers and antibiotics, as well as some other medications, if you have an enlarged left upper heart chamber (atrium) or after heart surgery.	Avoid stooping or bending, especially soon after eating.	Avoid lying down after eating. Wait at least three hours after eating to lie down or go to bed.	Raise the head of your bed. Place wooden blocks under your bed to elevate your head. Aim for an elevation of 6 to 8 inches (15 to 20 centimeters). Raising your head by using only pillows isn't effective. 	
Essential thrombocythemia|Headache	Dizziness or lightheadedness	Chest pain	Weakness	Fainting	Temporary vision changes	Numbness or tingling of the hands and feet	Redness, throbbing and burning pain in the hands and feet (erythromelalgia)	Mildly enlarged spleen	|Eat healthy foods. Choose a varied diet rich in whole grains, vegetables and fruits and low in saturated fats. Try to avoid trans fats. Learn about portion control to maintain a normal weight.	Increase your physical activity. Aim for at least 30 minutes of moderate physical activity a day. Take a brisk daily walk, ride your bike or swim laps.	Achieve or maintain normal weight. Being overweight or obese increases the pressure in the veins in your pelvis and legs and is a risk factor for conditions such as high blood pressure.	Stop smoking. If you smoke, take steps to try to stop.	
Exercise headaches|Are usually described as throbbing	Occur during or after strenuous exercise	Affect both sides of the head in most cases	|
Exercise-induced asthma|Coughing	Wheezing	Shortness of breath	Chest tightness or pain	Fatigue during exercise	Poorer than expected athletic performance	Feeling out of shape even when you're in good physical shape	Avoidance of activity (a sign primarily among young children)	|Do a 10-minute warm-up that varies in intensity before you begin regular exercise.	Breathe through your nose to warm and humidify the air before it enters your lungs.	Wear a face mask or scarf when exercising, especially in cold, dry weather.	If you have allergies, avoid triggers. For example, don't exercise outside when pollen counts are high.	Avoid strenuous exercise if you have a cold or other respiratory infection.	Exercise regularly to stay in shape and promote good respiratory health.	
Eye floaters|Spots in your vision that appear as dark specks or knobby, transparent strings of floating material	Spots that move when you move your eyes, so when you try to look at them, they move quickly out of your visual field	Spots that are most noticeable when you look at a plain bright background, such as a blue sky or a white wall	Spots that eventually settle down and drift out of the line of vision	|
Eye melanoma|A growing dark spot on the iris	A sensation of flashing lights	A change in the shape of the dark circle (pupil) at the center of your eye	Poor or blurry vision in one eye	Loss of peripheral vision	Sensation of flashes and specks of dust in your vision (floaters)	|
Eyestrain|Sore, tired, burning or itching eyes	Watery or dry eyes	Blurred or double vision	Headache	Sore neck, shoulders or back	Increased sensitivity to light	Difficulty concentrating	Feeling that you cannot keep your eyes open	| Adjust the lighting. When watching television, it may be easier on your eyes if you keep the room softly lit. When reading printed materials or doing close work, try to position the light source behind you and direct the light onto your page or task. If you're reading at a desk, use a shaded light positioned in front of you. The shade will keep light from shining directly into your eyes. 	Take breaks. When doing close work, take occasional breaks and ease muscle tension with relaxation exercises. Place your elbows on your desk, palms facing up. Let your weight fall forward and your head fall into your hands. Position your head so that your hands cover your eyes, with your fingers extended toward your forehead. Close your eyes and take a deep breath through your nose; hold it for four seconds, then exhale. Continue this deep breathing for 15 to 30 seconds. Perform this simple exercise several times a day.	Limit screen time. This is especially important for children, who may not make the connection between extended viewing, eyestrain and the need to rest their eyes regularly.	 Use artificial tears. Over-the-counter artificial tears can help prevent and relieve dry eyes. Use them even when your eyes feel fine to keep them well-lubricated and prevent a recurrence of symptoms. Your doctor can suggest which drops might be best for you. Lubricating drops that don't contain preservatives can be used as often as you need. If the drops you're using contain preservatives, don't use them more than four times a day. Avoid eyedrops with a redness remover, as these may worsen dry eye symptoms. 	Improve the air quality of your space. Some changes that may help prevent dry eyes include using a humidifier, adjusting the thermostat to reduce blowing air and avoiding smoke. If you smoke, consider quitting. Moving your chair to a different area may help reduce the amount of dry moving air on your eyes and face.	 Choose the right eyewear for you. If you need glasses or contacts and work at a computer, consider investing in glasses or contact lenses designed specifically for computer work. Ask your optometrist about lens coatings and tints that might help too. If you drive long distances, consider wearing sunglasses with polarized lenses and UV protection. 	
Factitious disorder|Clever and convincing medical problems	Frequent hospitalizations	Vague or inconsistent symptoms	Conditions that get worse for no apparent reason	Conditions that don't respond as expected to standard therapies	Eagerness to have frequent testing or risky operations	Extensive knowledge of medical terms and diseases	Seeking treatment from many different doctors or hospitals, which may include using a fake name	Having few visitors when hospitalized	Reluctance to allow health professionals to talk to family or friends or to other health care providers	Arguing with hospital staff	Frequent requests for pain relievers or other medications	|Stick to your treatment plan. Attend therapy appointments and take any medications as directed. If you feel an urge to harm yourself or cause yourself to become ill, talk honestly to your therapist or primary care doctor for better ways to cope with your emotions.	Have a medical gatekeeper. Have one trusted primary health care provider to manage your medical care, rather than visiting numerous providers, specialists and surgeons.	Remember the risks. Remind yourself that you could face permanent injury or even death each time you hurt yourself or have a risky test or surgery needlessly.	Don't run. Resist urges to find a new health care provider or to flee to a new town where medical professionals aren't aware of your background. Your therapist can help you overcome these powerful urges.	Connect with someone. Many people with factitious disorder lack friendships and other relationships. Try to find someone you're able to confide in, share enjoyable times with and offer your own support to.	
Factor V Leiden|Pain	Significant swelling	Redness	Warmth	| Uninterrupted long car or airline trips. When your legs remain still for long periods — more than two hours — your calf muscles don't contract, which normally helps blood circulate. If you can, try to move around whenever possible on a plane. Drink extra water to prevent dehydration, and avoid alcohol. On a car trip, take periodic breaks and walk around. If you sit for long periods of time for any reason, get up periodically and stretch your legs. 	Prolonged bed rest, such as during a long illness, or paralysis. Your doctor may suggest the use of compression stockings to keep the blood in your legs moving.	Injury or surgery. Injury to your veins or surgery can slow blood flow, increasing the risk of blood clots. General anesthetics used during surgery can dilate your veins, which can increase the risk of blood pooling and then clotting. Let your doctor know that you have factor V Leiden.	Oral contraceptives or estrogen replacement therapy. Because these medications can increase the risk of blood clots on their own, be sure to discuss the risks and the benefits of estrogen-containing medications with your doctor if you have factor V Leiden.	Being overweight or obese. Being overweight increases the pressure in the veins in your pelvis and legs. Losing weight can lower your risk.	Smoking. Smoking affects blood clotting and circulation. If you're a smoker, take steps to quit.	
Flatfeet||Rest. Avoid activities that aggravate your condition. Participate in low-impact activities — such as walking, biking or swimming — rather than jumping and running activities.	Arch supports. Over-the-counter arch supports might increase your comfort.	Medications. Over-the-counter pain relievers might help.	Weight loss. Losing weight can reduce stress on your feet.	
Familial adenomatous polyposis|Duodenal polyps. These polyps grow in the upper part of your small intestine and may become cancerous. But with careful monitoring, duodenal polyps can often be detected and removed before cancer develops.	Periampullary polyps. These polyps occur where the bile and pancreas ducts enter the duodenum (ampulla). Periampullary polyps might become cancerous but can often be detected and removed before cancer develops.	Desmoids. These noncancerous masses can arise anywhere in the body but often develop in the stomach area (abdomen). Desmoids can cause serious problems if they grow into nerves or blood vessels or exert pressure on other organs in your body.	Other cancers. Rarely, FAP can cause cancer to develop in your thyroid gland, central nervous system, adrenal glands, liver or other organs.	Noncancerous skin tumors.	Noncancerous bone tumors.	Pigment changes in the retina of your eye.	Dental abnormalities.	|Duodenal polyps. These polyps grow in the upper part of your small intestine and may become cancerous. But with careful monitoring, duodenal polyps can often be detected and removed before cancer develops.	Periampullary polyps. These polyps occur where the bile and pancreas ducts enter the duodenum (ampulla). Periampullary polyps might become cancerous but can often be detected and removed before cancer develops.	Desmoids. These noncancerous masses can arise anywhere in the body but often develop in the stomach area (abdomen). Desmoids can cause serious problems if they grow into nerves or blood vessels or exert pressure on other organs in your body.	Other cancers. Rarely, FAP can cause cancer to develop in your thyroid gland, central nervous system, adrenal glands, liver or other organs.	Noncancerous skin tumors.	Noncancerous bone tumors.	Pigment changes in the retina of your eye.	Dental abnormalities.	
Familial Mediterranean fever|Fever	Abdominal pain	Chest pain	Achy, swollen joints	Constipation followed by diarrhea	A red rash on your legs, especially below your knees 	Muscle aches	A swollen, tender scrotum	|
Farsightedness|Nearby objects may appear blurry	You need to squint to see clearly	You have eyestrain, including burning eyes, and aching in or around the eyes	You experience general eye discomfort or a headache after a prolonged interval of conducting close tasks, such as reading, writing, computer work or drawing	|
Febrile seizure|Have a fever higher than 100.4 F (38.0 C)	Lose consciousness	Shake or jerk arms and legs	|Place your child on his or her side on a surface where he or she won't fall.	Stay close to watch and comfort your child.	Remove hard or sharp objects near your child.	Loosen tight or restrictive clothing.	Don't restrain your child or interfere with your child's movements.	Don't put anything in your child's mouth.	Time the seizure.	
Female infertility|If you're in your early 30s or younger, most doctors recommend trying to get pregnant for at least a year before having any testing or treatment. 	If you're between 35 and 40, discuss your concerns with your doctor after six months of trying. 	If you're older than 40, your doctor may want to begin testing or treatment right away. 	|
Female sexual dysfunction|Low sexual desire. This most common of female sexual dysfunctions involves a lack of sexual interest and willingness to be sexual.	Sexual arousal disorder. Your desire for sex might be intact, but you have difficulty with arousal or are unable to become aroused or maintain arousal during sexual activity.	Orgasmic disorder. You have persistent or recurrent difficulty in achieving orgasm after sufficient sexual arousal and ongoing stimulation.	Sexual pain disorder. You have pain associated with sexual stimulation or vaginal contact.	|Avoid excessive alcohol. Drinking too much blunts sexual responsiveness.	Don't smoke. Cigarette smoking restricts blood flow throughout your body. Less blood reaches your sexual organs, which means you could experience decreased sexual arousal and orgasmic response.	Be physically active. Regular aerobic exercise increases your stamina, improves your body image and elevates your mood. This can help you feel more romantic, more often.	Make time for leisure and relaxation. Learn ways to decrease stress, and allow yourself to relax amid the stresses of your daily life. Being relaxed can enhance your ability to focus on your sexual experiences and may help you attain more satisfying arousal and orgasm.	
Fetal alcohol syndrome|Distinctive facial features, including wide-set eyes, an exceptionally thin upper lip, a short, upturned nose, and a smooth skin surface between the nose and upper lip	Deformities of joints, limbs and fingers	Slow physical growth before and after birth	Vision difficulties or hearing problems	Small head circumference and brain size	Heart defects and problems with kidneys and bones	|
Fetal macrosomia|Large fundal height. During prenatal visits, your health care provider might measure your fundal height — the distance from the top of your uterus to your pubic bone. A fundal height that measures larger than expected could be a sign of fetal macrosomia.	 Excessive amniotic fluid (polyhydramnios). Too much amniotic fluid — the fluid that surrounds and protects a baby during pregnancy — might be a sign that your baby is larger than average. The amount of amniotic fluid reflects your baby's urine output, and a larger baby produces more urine. Some conditions that increase a baby's size might also increase his or her urine output. 	|
Fever|Sweating	Shivering	Headache	Muscle aches	Loss of appetite	Dehydration	General weakness	|Drink plenty of fluids. Fever can cause fluid loss and dehydration, so drink water, juices or broth. For a child under age 1, use an oral rehydration solution such as Pedialyte. These solutions contain water and salts proportioned to replenish fluids and electrolytes. Pedialyte ice pops also are available.	Rest. You need rest to recover, and activity can raise your body temperature.	Stay cool. Dress in light clothing, keep the room temperature cool and sleep with only a sheet or light blanket.	
Fibroadenoma|Round with distinct borders	Easily moved	Firm or rubbery	Painless	|
Fibrocystic breasts|Breast lumps or areas of thickening that tend to blend into the surrounding breast tissue	Generalized breast pain or tenderness	Fluctuating size of breast lumps	Green or dark brown nonbloody nipple discharge that tends to leak without pressure or squeezing	Changes that occur in both breasts, rather than just one	Monthly increase in breast pain or lumpiness from midcycle (ovulation) to just before your period	|Wear a firm support bra, fitted by a professional, if possible.	Wear a sports bra during exercise and while sleeping, especially when your breasts are extra sensitive.	Limit or avoid caffeine, a dietary change many women report as helpful, although medical studies of caffeine's effect on breast pain and other premenstrual symptoms have been inconclusive.	Decrease the fat in your diet, which may decrease breast pain or discomfort associated with fibrocystic breasts.	Reduce or stop taking hormone therapy if you're postmenopausal — but be sure to talk to your doctor before making any change in your prescription medications.	Use a heating pad or warm water bottle to relieve your discomfort.	
Fibromuscular dysplasia|High blood pressure	Tissue damage in your kidney (ischemic renal atrophy)	Chronic kidney failure, rarely	|
Fibromyalgia|Widespread pain. The pain associated with fibromyalgia often is described as a constant dull ache that has lasted for at least three months. To be considered widespread, the pain must occur on both sides of your body and above and below your waist.	Fatigue. People with fibromyalgia often awaken tired, even though they report sleeping for long periods of time. Sleep is often disrupted by pain, and many patients with fibromyalgia have other sleep disorders, such as restless legs syndrome and sleep apnea.	Cognitive difficulties. A symptom commonly referred to as "fibro fog" impairs the ability to focus, pay attention and concentrate on mental tasks.	Other problems. Many people who have fibromyalgia also may experience depression, headaches, and pain or cramping in the lower abdomen.	|Reduce stress. Develop a plan to avoid or limit overexertion and emotional stress. Allow yourself time each day to relax. That may mean learning how to say no without guilt. But try not to change your routine completely. People who quit work or drop all activity tend to do worse than do those who remain active. Try stress management techniques, such as deep-breathing exercises or meditation.	Get enough sleep. Because fatigue is one of the main characteristics of fibromyalgia, getting sufficient sleep is essential. In addition to allotting enough time for sleep, practice good sleep habits, such as going to bed and getting up at the same time each day and limiting daytime napping.	Exercise regularly. At first, exercise may increase your pain. But doing it gradually and regularly often decreases symptoms. Appropriate exercises may include walking, swimming, biking and water aerobics. A physical therapist can help you develop a home exercise program. Stretching, good posture and relaxation exercises also are helpful.	Pace yourself. Keep your activity on an even level. If you do too much on your good days, you may have more bad days. Moderation means not overdoing it on your good days, but likewise it means not self-limiting or doing too littleon the days when symptoms flare.	Maintain a healthy lifestyle. Eat healthy foods. Limit your caffeine intake. Do something that you find enjoyable and fulfilling every day.	
Fibrous dysplasia|Bone pain	Bone deformities	Fractures	Nerve entrapment	|
Folliculitis|Clusters of small red bumps or white-headed pimples that develop around hair follicles 	Pus-filled blisters that break open and crust over 	Red and inflamed skin 	Itchy or burning skin 	Tenderness or pain 	A large swollen bump or mass 	|Apply a warm, moist washcloth or compress. Do this several times a day to relieve discomfort and help the area drain, if needed. Moisten the compress with a saltwater solution (1 teaspoon of table salt in 2 cups of water).	Apply over-the-counter antibiotics. Try various nonprescription infection-fighting gels, creams and washes.	Apply soothing lotions. Try relieving itchy skin with an oatmeal lotion or an over-the-counter hydrocortisone cream.	Clean the affected skin. Gently wash the infected skin twice a day with antibacterial soap. Use a clean washcloth and towel each time and don't share your towels or washcloths. Use hot, soapy water to wash these items. And wash clothing that has touched the affected area.	Protect the skin. If possible, avoid shaving. If you must shave, try an electric razor. When you're done, rinse your skin with warm water and apply moisturizer.	
Food allergy|Tingling or itching in the mouth	Hives, itching or eczema	Swelling of the lips, face, tongue and throat or other parts of the body	Wheezing, nasal congestion or trouble breathing	Abdominal pain, diarrhea, nausea or vomiting	Dizziness, lightheadedness or fainting	| Don't assume. Always read food labels to make sure they don't contain an ingredient you're allergic to. Even if you think you know what's in a food, check the label. Ingredients sometimes change. Food labels are required to clearly list whether they contain any common food allergens. Read food labels carefully to avoid the most common sources of food allergens: milk, eggs, peanuts, tree nuts, fish, shellfish, soy and wheat. 	When in doubt, say no thanks. At restaurants and social gatherings, you're always taking a risk that you might eat a food you're allergic to. Many people don't understand the seriousness of an allergic food reaction and may not realize that a tiny amount of a food can cause a severe reaction in some people. If you have any suspicion at all that a food may contain something you're allergic to, steer clear.	 Involve caregivers. If your child has a food allergy, enlist the help of relatives, baby sitters, teachers and other caregivers. Make sure they understand how important it is for your child to avoid the allergy-causing food and that they know what to do in an emergency. It's also important to let caregivers know what steps they can take to prevent a reaction in the first place, such as careful hand-washing and cleaning any surfaces that might have come in contact with the allergy-causing food. 	
Food poisoning|Nausea	Vomiting	Watery diarrhea	Abdominal pain and cramps	Fever	|Let your stomach settle. Stop eating and drinking for a few hours.	Try sucking on ice chips or taking small sips of water. You might also try drinking clear soda, clear broth or noncaffeinated sports drinks, such as Gatorade. You're getting enough fluid when you're urinating normally and your urine is clear and not dark.	Ease back into eating. Gradually begin to eat bland, low-fat, easy-to-digest foods, such as soda crackers, toast, gelatin, bananas and rice. Stop eating if your nausea returns.	Avoid certain foods and substances until you're feeling better. These include dairy products, caffeine, alcohol, nicotine, and fatty or highly seasoned foods.	Rest. The illness and dehydration can weaken and tire you.	
Foot drop||Keep all floors clear of clutter.	Avoid the use of throw rugs.	Relocate electrical cords away from walkways.	Make sure rooms and stairways are well lit.	Place fluorescent tape on the top and bottom steps of stairways.	
Frontal lobe seizures|Head and eye movement to one side 	Complete or partial unresponsiveness or difficulty speaking 	Explosive screams, including profanities, or laughter 	Abnormal body posturing, such as one arm extending while the other flexes, as if the person is posing like a fencer 	Repetitive movements, such as rocking, bicycle pedaling or pelvic thrusting 	|Treatments and drugs	Alternative medicine	
Frontotemporal dementia|Increasingly inappropriate actions 	Loss of empathy and other interpersonal skills 	Lack of judgment and inhibition 	Apathy 	Repetitive compulsive behavior 	A decline in personal hygiene 	Changes in eating habits, predominantly overeating 	Lack of awareness of thinking or behavioral changes 	|Avoiding events or activities that trigger the undesirable behavior	Anticipating needs and meeting them promptly	Maintaining a calm environment	Providing structured routines	Simplifying daily tasks	
Frostbite|At first, cold skin and a prickling feeling	Numbness	Red, white, bluish-white or grayish-yellow skin	Hard or waxy-looking skin	Clumsiness due to joint and muscle stiffness	Blistering after rewarming, in severe cases	|Take all medications — antibiotics or pain medicine — as prescribed by your doctor. For milder cases of frostbite, take over-the-counter ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin IB, others) to reduce pain and inflammation.	For superficial frostbite that has been rewarmed, apply aloe vera gel or lotion to the affected area several times a day to reduce inflammation.	Avoid further exposure to cold and wind.	Don't walk on frostbitten feet.	Don't apply direct heat or rub the area.	Don't break blisters that may develop. Blisters act like a bandage. Allow blisters to break on their own. 	
Frozen shoulder|Freezing stage. Any movement of your shoulder causes pain, and your shoulder's range of motion starts to become limited.	Frozen stage. Pain may begin to diminish during this stage. However, your shoulder becomes stiffer, and using it becomes more difficult.	Thawing stage. The range of motion in your shoulder begins to improve.	|Treatments and drugs	Alternative medicine	
Fuchs' dystrophy|Glare, which is an early symptom and reduces contrast perception or affects vision in low light.	Blurred vision, which occurs in the morning after awakening and gradually improves during the day. As the disease progresses, vision can take longer to improve or may not improve.	Distorted vision, sensitivity to light, difficulty seeing at night and seeing halos around light 	Painful, tiny blisters on the surface of your cornea	A cornea that looks cloudy or hazy	|Apply over-the-counter (nonprescription) salt solution (5 percent sodium chloride) eyedrops or ointment.	Wear wraparound sunglasses with ultraviolet protection.	Dry your eyes with a hair dryer. Hold it at arm's length and direct warm — not hot — air across your face two or three times a day. This helps remove excess fluid in the cornea and dry out microscopic swelling and blisters on the surface of the cornea.	
Generalized anxiety disorder|Persistent worrying or obsession about small or large concerns that's out of proportion to the impact of the event	Inability to set aside or let go of a worry	Inability to relax, restlessness, and feeling keyed up or on edge	Difficulty concentrating, or the feeling that your mind "goes blank"	Worrying about excessively worrying	Distress about making decisions for fear of making the wrong decision	Carrying every option in a situation all the way out to its possible negative conclusion	Difficulty handling uncertainty or indecisiveness	|Keep physically active. Develop a routine so that you're physically active most days of the week. Exercise is a powerful stress reducer. It may improve your mood and help you stay healthy. Start out slowly and gradually increase the amount and intensity of your activities.	Avoid alcohol and other sedatives. These substances can worsen anxiety.	Quit smoking and cut back or quit drinking coffee. Both nicotine and caffeine can worsen anxiety.	Use relaxation techniques. Visualization techniques, meditation and yoga are examples of relaxation techniques that can ease anxiety.	Make sleep a priority. Do what you can to make sure you're getting enough sleep to feel rested. If you aren't sleeping well, see your doctor.	Eat healthy. Healthy eating — such as focusing on vegetables, fruits, whole grains and fish — may be linked to reduced anxiety, but more research is needed.	
Gallbladder cancer|Abdominal pain, particularly in the upper right portion of the abdomen	Abdominal bloating	Itchiness	Fever	Loss of appetite	Losing weight without trying	Nausea	Yellowing of the skin and whites of the eyes (jaundice)	|
Gallstones|Sudden and rapidly intensifying pain in the upper right portion of your abdomen	Sudden and rapidly intensifying pain in the center of your abdomen, just below your breastbone	Back pain between your shoulder blades	Pain in your right shoulder	|
Gangrene|Skin discoloration — ranging from pale to blue, purple, black, bronze or red, depending on the type of gangrene you have	A clear line between healthy and damaged skin	Severe pain followed by a feeling of numbness	A foul-smelling discharge leaking from a sore	|
Gas and gas pains|Voluntary or involuntary passing of gas, either as belches or as flatus.	Sharp, jabbing pains or cramps in your abdomen. These pains may occur anywhere in your abdomen and can change locations quickly and get better quickly.	A 'knotted' feeling in your abdomen.	Swelling and tightness in your abdomen (bloating).	|Try smaller portions. Many of the foods that can cause gas are part of a healthy diet. So, try eating smaller portions of problem foods to see if your body can handle a smaller portion without creating excess gas.	Eat slowly, chew your food thoroughly and don't gulp. If you have a hard time slowing down, put down your fork between each bite.	Avoid chewing gum, sucking on hard candies and drinking through a straw. These activities can cause you to swallow more air.	Check your dentures. Poorly fitting dentures can cause you to swallow excess air when you eat and drink.	Don't smoke. Cigarette smoking can increase the amount of air you swallow.	Exercise. Physical activity may help move gas through the digestive tract.	
Gastroparesis|Vomiting	Nausea	A feeling of fullness after eating just a few bites	Abdominal bloating	Abdominal pain	Changes in blood sugar levels	Lack of appetite	Weight loss and malnutrition	|
Gastritis|Gnawing or burning ache or pain (indigestion) in your upper abdomen that may become either worse or better with eating	Nausea	Vomiting	A feeling of fullness in your upper abdomen after eating	|Eat smaller, more-frequent meals. If you experience frequent indigestion, try eating several small meals instead of three large ones whenever you can.	Avoid irritating foods. Avoid foods that irritate your stomach, especially those that are spicy, acidic, fried or fatty.	Avoid alcohol. Alcohol can irritate the mucous lining of your stomach.	Consider switching pain relievers. If you use pain relievers regularly, ask your doctor whether acetaminophen (Tylenol, others) may be an option for you. This medication is less likely to aggravate your stomach problem.	Manage stress. Stress may make your gastritis symptoms worse. Stress may be hard to avoid, but you can learn to cope with it. If you have trouble relaxing, consider calming activities, such as meditation, yoga or tai chi.	
GERD|A burning sensation in your chest (heartburn), sometimes spreading to your throat, along with a sour taste in your mouth	Chest pain	Difficulty swallowing (dysphagia)	Dry cough	Hoarseness or sore throat	Regurgitation of food or sour liquid (acid reflux)	Sensation of a lump in your throat	|Maintain a healthy weight. Excess pounds put pressure on your abdomen, pushing up your stomach and causing acid to back up into your esophagus. If your weight is healthy, work to maintain it. If you are overweight or obese, work to slowly lose weight — no more than 1 or 2 pounds (0.5 to 1 kilogram) a week. Ask your doctor for help in devising a weight-loss strategy that will work for you.	Avoid tight-fitting clothing. Clothes that fit tightly around your waist put pressure on your abdomen and the lower esophageal sphincter.	Avoid foods and drinks that trigger heartburn. Everyone has specific triggers. Common triggers such as fatty or fried foods, tomato sauce, alcohol, chocolate, mint, garlic, onion, and caffeine may make heartburn worse. Avoid foods you know will trigger your heartburn.	Eat smaller meals. Avoid overeating by eating smaller meals.	Don't lie down after a meal. Wait at least three hours after eating before lying down or going to bed.	Elevate the head of your bed. If you regularly experience heartburn at night or while trying to sleep, put gravity to work for you. Place wood or cement blocks under the feet of your bed so that the head end is raised by 6 to 9 inches. If it's not possible to elevate your bed, you can insert a wedge between your mattress and box spring to elevate your body from the waist up. Wedges are available at drugstores and medical supply stores. Raising your head with additional pillows is not effective.	Don't smoke. Smoking decreases the lower esophageal sphincter's ability to function properly.	
Gastrointestinal bleeding|Peptic ulcers	Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD)	Diverticulosis	Hemorrhoids	Colon polyps	Abnormalities in blood vessels in the digestive tract	Cancerous tumors	|Peptic ulcers	Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD)	Diverticulosis	Hemorrhoids	Colon polyps	Abnormalities in blood vessels in the digestive tract	Cancerous tumors	
Gaucher's disease|Abdominal complaints. Because the liver and especially the spleen can enlarge dramatically, the abdomen can become painfully distended.	Skeletal abnormalities. Gaucher's disease can weaken bone, increasing the risk of painful fractures. It can also interfere with the blood supply to your bones, which can cause portions of the bone to die.	Blood disorders. A decrease in healthy red blood cells (anemia) can result in severe fatigue. Gaucher's disease also affects the cells responsible for clotting, which can cause easy bruising and nosebleeds.	|
Genital herpes|Pain or itching that begins within two to 10 days after exposure to an infected sexual partner	Small red bumps or tiny white blisters, which may appear several days later	Ulcers that form when the blisters rupture and ooze or bleed	Scabs that form as the ulcers heal	|
Genital warts|Small, flesh-colored or gray swellings in your genital area 	Several warts close together that take on a cauliflower shape 	Itching or discomfort in your genital area 	Bleeding with intercourse 	|
Geographic tongue|Smooth, red, irregularly shaped patches (lesions) on the top or side of your tongue 	Frequent changes in the location, size and shape of lesions 	Discomfort, pain or burning sensation in some cases, most often related to eating hot, spicy, salty or acidic foods 	|Hot, spicy, acidic or salty foods 	Tobacco products 	Toothpaste that contains tartar-control additives, heavy flavoring or whitening agents 	
Giant cell arteritis|Persistent, severe head pain, usually in your temple area	Scalp tenderness	Jaw pain when you chew or open your mouth wide	Fever	Fatigue	Unintended weight loss	Vision loss or double vision, particularly in people who also have jaw pain	Sudden, permanent loss of vision in one eye	|Eat a healthy diet. Eating well can help prevent potential problems, such as thinning bones, high blood pressure and diabetes. Emphasize fresh fruits and vegetables, whole grains, and lean meats and fish, while limiting salt, sugar and alcohol. Be sure to get adequate amounts of calcium and vitamin D. Experts recommend 1,200 milligrams of calcium and 800 international units (IU) of vitamin D a day for women over 50 and men over 70. Check with your doctor to see what dose is right for you.	Exercise regularly. Regular aerobic exercise, such as walking, can help prevent bone loss, high blood pressure and diabetes. It also benefits your heart and lungs. In addition, many people find that exercise improves their mood and overall sense of well-being. If you're not used to exercising, start out slowly and build up gradually. Your doctor can help you plan an exercise program that's right for you.	Get regular checkups. See your doctor to check for side effects of treatment and development of any complications.	Ask about aspirin. Ask your doctor about taking between 75 and 150 milligrams of aspirin daily. Taken daily, low-dose aspirin may reduce the risk of blindness and stroke.	
Giardiasis|Watery, sometimes foul-smelling diarrhea that may alternate with soft, greasy stools	Fatigue or malaise	Abdominal cramps and bloating	Gas or flatulence	Nausea	Weight loss	|
Gilbert's syndrome|Illness, such as a cold or the flu	Fasting or eating a very low-calorie diet	Dehydration	Menstruation	Stress	Strenuous exercise	Lack of sleep	|Make sure your doctors know you have Gilbert's syndrome. Because Gilbert's syndrome affects the way your body processes certain medications, every doctor you visit needs to know about the condition.	Eat a healthy diet. Avoid extremely low-calorie diets. Stick to a routine eating schedule, and avoid fasting or skipping meals.	Manage stress. Find ways to deal with the stresses in your life, such as exercise, meditation or listening to music.	
Gingivitis|Swollen gums	Soft, puffy gums	Receding gums	Occasionally, tender gums	Gums that bleed easily when you brush or floss, sometimes seen as redness or pinkness on your brush or floss	A change in the color of your gums from a healthy pink to dusky red	Bad breath	|Get regular professional dental cleanings, on a schedule recommended by your dentist.	Use a soft toothbrush and replace it at least every three to four months. 	Consider using an electric toothbrush, which may be more effective at removing plaque and tartar.	Brush your teeth twice a day, or better yet, after every meal or snack. 	Floss at least once a day.	Use an antiseptic mouthwash, if recommended by your dentist.	Use an interdental cleaner, such as a dental pick or dental stick specially designed to clean between your teeth.	
Glaucoma|Patchy blind spots in your side (peripheral) or central vision, frequently in both eyes	Tunnel vision in the advanced stages	|Eat a healthy diet. Eating a healthy diet can help you maintain your health, but it won't prevent glaucoma from worsening. Several vitamins and nutrients are important to eye health, including those found in dark, leafy greens and fish high in omega-3 fatty acids.	Exercise safely. Regular exercise may reduce eye pressure in open-angle glaucoma. Talk to your doctor about an appropriate exercise program.	Limit your caffeine. Drinking beverages with large amounts of caffeine may increase your eye pressure.	Sip fluids frequently. Drink only moderate amounts of fluids at any given time during the course of a day. Drinking a quart or more of any liquid within a short time may temporarily increase eye pressure.	Sleep with your head elevated. Using a wedge pillow that keeps your head slightly raised, about 20 degrees, has been shown to reduce intraocular eye pressure while you sleep.	 Take prescribed medicine. Using your eyedrops or other medications as prescribed can help you get the best possible result from your treatment. Be sure to use the drops exactly as prescribed. Otherwise, your optic nerve damage could get even worse. Because some of the eyedrops are absorbed into your bloodstream, you may experience some side effects unrelated to your eyes. To minimize this absorption, close your eyes for one to two minutes after putting the drops in. Or press lightly at the corner of your eye near your nose to close the tear duct for one or two minutes. Wipe off any unused drops from your eyelid. 	
Glomerulonephritis|Pink or cola-colored urine from red blood cells in your urine (hematuria)	Foamy urine due to excess protein (proteinuria)	High blood pressure (hypertension)	Fluid retention (edema) with swelling evident in your face, hands, feet and abdomen	Fatigue from anemia or kidney failure	|Restrict your salt intake to prevent or minimize fluid retention, swelling and hypertension	Cut back on protein and potassium consumption to slow the buildup of wastes in your blood	Maintain a healthy weight	Control your blood sugar level if you have diabetes	Quit smoking	
Goiter|A visible swelling at the base of your neck that may be particularly obvious when you shave or put on makeup	A tight feeling in your throat	Coughing	Hoarseness	Difficulty swallowing	Difficulty breathing	| Get enough iodine. To ensure that you get enough iodine, use iodized salt or eat seafood or seaweed — sushi is a good seaweed source — about twice a week. Shrimp and other shellfish are particularly high in iodine. If you live near the coast, locally grown fruits and vegetables are likely to contain some iodine, too, as are cow's milk and yogurt. Everyone needs about 150 micrograms of iodine a day (the amount in slightly less than half a teaspoon of iodized salt). But adequate amounts are especially important for pregnant and lactating women and for infants and children. 	Reduce iodine consumption. Although it's uncommon, getting too much iodine sometimes leads to goiter. If excess iodine is a problem, avoid iodine-fortified salt, shellfish, seaweed and iodine supplements. 	
Golfer's elbow|Pain and tenderness on the inner side of your elbow. Sometimes the pain extends along the inner side of your forearm. Pain typically worsens with certain movements.	Stiffness. Your elbow may feel stiff, and it may hurt to make a fist.	Weakness. You may have weakness in your hands and wrists.	Numbness or tingling. These sensations might radiate into one or more fingers — usually the ring and little fingers.	|
Gonorrhea|Painful urination	Pus-like discharge from the tip of the penis	Pain or swelling in one testicle	|
Gout|Intense joint pain. Gout usually affects the large joint of your big toe, but it can occur in your feet, ankles, knees, hands and wrists. The pain is likely to be most severe within the first four to 12 hours after it begins.	Lingering discomfort. After the most severe pain subsides, some joint discomfort may last from a few days to a few weeks. Later attacks are likely to last longer and affect more joints.	Inflammation and redness. The affected joint or joints become swollen, tender, warm and red.	Limited range of motion. Decreased joint mobility may occur as gout progresses.	|Limiting alcoholic beverages and drinks sweetened with fruit sugar (fructose). Instead, drink plenty of nonalcoholic beverages, especially water.	Limit intake of foods high in purines, such as red meat, organ meats and seafood.	Exercising regularly and losing weight. Keeping your body at a healthy weight reduces your risk of gout.	
Grand mal seizure|Tonic phase. Loss of consciousness occurs, and the muscles suddenly contract and cause the person to fall down. This phase tends to last about 10 to 20 seconds.	Clonic phase. The muscles go into rhythmic contractions, alternately flexing and relaxing. Convulsions usually last for less than two minutes.	|Treatments and drugs	Coping and support	
Graves' disease|Anxiety and irritability	A fine tremor of your hands or fingers	Heat sensitivity and an increase in perspiration or warm, moist skin	Weight loss, despite normal eating habits	Enlargement of your thyroid gland (goiter)	Change in menstrual cycles	Erectile dysfunction or reduced libido	Frequent bowel movements	Bulging eyes (Graves' ophthalmopathy)	Thick, red skin usually on the shins or tops of the feet (Graves' dermopathy)	Rapid or irregular heartbeat (palpitations)	|Eating well and exercising can enhance the improvement in some symptoms while being treated and help you feel better in general. For example, because your thyroid controls your metabolism, you may have a tendency to gain weight when the hyperthyroidism is corrected. Brittle bones can also occur with Graves' disease and weight-bearing exercises can help maintain bone density.	Easing stress as much as you can may be helpful, as stress may trigger or worsen Graves' disease. Listening to music, taking a warm bath or walking can help relax you and put you in a better frame of mind. Partner with your doctor to construct a plan that incorporates good nutrition, exercise and relaxation into your daily routine.	
Group B strep disease|Fever	Difficulty feeding	Lethargy	|
Growing pains|Persistent 	Still present in the morning 	Severe enough to interfere with your child's normal activities 	Located in the joints 	Associated with an injury 	Accompanied by other signs or symptoms, such as swelling, redness, tenderness, fever, limping, rash, loss of appetite, weakness or fatigue 	Associated with an injury 	|Rub your child's legs. Children often respond to gentle massage. Others feel better when they're held or cuddled. 	Use a heating pad. Heat can help soothe sore muscles. Use a heating pad on a low setting before bedtime or when your child complains of leg pain. Remove the heating pad once your child falls asleep. A warm bath before bedtime may help, too. 	Try a pain reliever. Offer your child ibuprofen (Advil, Children's Motrin, others) or acetaminophen (Tylenol, others). Avoid aspirin, due to the risk of Reye's syndrome — a rare but serious condition linked to giving aspirin to children. 	Stretching exercises. Stretching the muscles in the legs during the day may help prevent pain at night. Ask your doctor what stretches might help. 	
Growth plate fractures|Pain and tenderness, particularly in response to pressure on the growth plate 	Inability to move the affected area or to put weight or pressure on the limb 	Warmth and swelling at the end of a bone, near a joint 	|
Guillain-Barre syndrome|Prickling, "pins and needles" sensations in your fingers, toes, ankles or wrists	Weakness in your legs that spreads to your upper body	Unsteady walking or inability to walk or climb stairs	Difficulty with eye or facial movements, including speaking, chewing or swallowing	Severe pain that may feel achy or cramp-like and may be worse at night	Difficulty with bladder control or bowel function	Rapid heart rate	Low or high blood pressure	Difficulty breathing	|
Gynecomastia|Swollen breast gland tissue	Breast tenderness	|
H. pylori infection|An ache or burning pain in your abdomen	Abdominal pain that's worse when your stomach is empty	Nausea	Loss of appetite	Frequent burping	Bloating	Unintentional weight loss	|
Hair loss|Gradual thinning on top of head. This is the most common type of hair loss, affecting both men and women as they age. In men, hair often begins to recede from the forehead in a line that resembles the letter M. Women typically retain the hairline on the forehead but have a broadening of the part in their hair.	Circular or patchy bald spots. Some people experience smooth, coin-sized bald spots. This type of hair loss usually affects just the scalp, but it sometimes also occurs in beards or eyebrows. In some cases, your skin may become itchy or painful before the hair falls out.	Sudden loosening of hair. A physical or emotional shock can cause hair to loosen. Handfuls of hair may come out when combing or washing your hair or even after gentle tugging. This type of hair loss usually causes overall hair thinning and not bald patches.	Full-body hair loss. Some conditions and medical treatments, such as chemotherapy for cancer, can result in the loss of hair all over your body. The hair usually grows back.	Patches of scaling that spread over the scalp. This is a sign of ringworm. It may be accompanied by broken hair, redness, swelling and, at times, oozing.	|
Hairy cell leukemia|A feeling of fullness in your abdomen that may make it uncomfortable to eat more than a little at a time	Fatigue	Easy bruising	Recurring infections	Weakness	Weight loss	|
Hamstring injury||Rest. Take a break from strenuous activities to rest your hamstring muscles and allow the damaged tissues to repair. Avoid any activity that causes pain, swelling or discomfort. For a more extensive injury, your doctor may recommend that you use crutches so that you keep your weight off your injured leg.	 Ice. Even if you're seeking medical help, ice the area immediately. For the first few days after the injury, put an ice pack on the injured area for 15 to 20 minutes every two to three hours while you're awake. Cold reduces pain, swelling and inflammation in injured muscles, joints and connective tissues. It may also slow bleeding if a tear has occurred. If your skin turns white when it's being iced, stop treatment immediately. If you have vascular disease, diabetes or decreased sensation, talk with your doctor before applying ice. 	 Compression. Wrap your leg with an elastic compression bandage until the swelling goes down. Be careful not to wrap your leg too tightly for you may impair circulation. Begin wrapping at the end farthest from your heart. Loosen the bandage if the pain increases, the area becomes numb or swelling occurs below the wrapped area. 	Elevation. Sit or lie back with your leg elevated while resting. If possible, elevate your leg higher than the level of your heart. Gravity helps reduce swelling by draining excess fluid.	
Hand-foot-and-mouth disease|Fever	Sore throat	Feeling of being unwell (malaise)	Painful, red, blister-like lesions on the tongue, gums and inside of the cheeks	A red rash, without itching but sometimes with blistering, on the palms, soles and sometimes the buttocks	Irritability in infants and toddlers	Loss of appetite	|Suck on ice pops or ice chips.	Eat ice cream or sherbet.	Drink cold beverages, such as milk or ice water.	Avoid acidic foods and beverages, such as citrus fruits, fruit drinks and soda.	Avoid salty or spicy foods.	Eat soft foods that don't require much chewing.	Rinse your mouth with warm water after meals.	
Hangovers|Fatigue and weakness	Thirst	Headaches and muscle aches	Nausea, vomiting or stomach pain	Poor or decreased sleep	Increased sensitivity to light and sound	Dizziness or a sense of the room spinning	Shakiness	Decreased ability to concentrate	Mood disturbances, such as depression, anxiety and irritability	Rapid heartbeat	|
Hantavirus pulmonary syndrome|Fever and chills	Headaches and muscle aches	Vomiting, diarrhea or abdominal pain	|
Hashimoto's disease|Fatigue and sluggishness	Increased sensitivity to cold	Constipation	Pale, dry skin	A puffy face	Hoarse voice	Unexplained weight gain — occurring infrequently and rarely exceeding 10 to 20 pounds, most of which is fluid	Muscle aches, tenderness and stiffness, especially in your shoulders and hips	Pain and stiffness in your joints and swelling in your knees or the small joints in your hands and feet	Muscle weakness, especially in your lower extremities	Excessive or prolonged menstrual bleeding (menorrhagia)	Depression	|
Hay fever|Runny nose and nasal congestion	Watery, itchy, red eyes (allergic conjunctivitis)	Sneezing	Cough	Itchy nose, roof of mouth or throat	Swollen, blue-colored skin under the eyes (allergic shiners)	Postnasal drip	Fatigue	|Close doors and windows during pollen season.	Don't hang laundry outside — pollen can stick to sheets and towels.	Use air conditioning in your house and car.	Use an allergy-grade filter in your home ventilation system and change it regularly.	Avoid outdoor activity in the early morning, when pollen counts are highest.	Stay indoors on dry, windy days.	Use a dehumidifier to reduce indoor humidity.	Use a high-efficiency particulate air (HEPA) filter in your bedroom and other rooms where you spend a lot of time.	Avoid mowing the lawn or raking leaves.	Wear a dust mask when cleaning house or gardening.	
Head and neck cancers|Esthesioneuroblastoma	Floor of mouth cancer	Lip cancer	Mouth cancer	Nasal cavity cancer	Nasopharyngeal cancer	Paranasal sinus cancer	Parathyroid cancer	Salivary gland cancer	Soft palate cancer	Throat cancer	Thyroid cancer	Tongue cancer	Tonsil cancer	|Esthesioneuroblastoma	Floor of mouth cancer	Lip cancer	Mouth cancer	Nasal cavity cancer	Nasopharyngeal cancer	Paranasal sinus cancer	Parathyroid cancer	Salivary gland cancer	Soft palate cancer	Throat cancer	Thyroid cancer	Tongue cancer	Tonsil cancer	
Head lice|Itching. Itching on the scalp, neck and ears is the most common symptom. This is an allergic reaction to louse saliva. When a person has an infestation for the first time, itching may not occur for two to six weeks after infestation.	Lice on scalp. Lice may be visible but are difficult to spot because they're small, avoid light and move quickly.	Lice eggs (nits) on hair shafts. Nits stick to hair shafts. Incubating nits may be difficult to see because they're very tiny and camouflaged to match hair color. They're easiest to spot around the ears and the hairline of the neck. Empty nits may be easier to spot because they're lighter in color and further from the scalp. However, the presence of nits doesn't necessarily indicate an active infestation.	|Tea tree oil	Anise oil	Ylang ylang oil	Nerolidol, a chemical compound found in many plant oils	
Headaches in children|Pulsating, throbbing or pounding head pain	Pain that worsens with exertion	Nausea	Vomiting	Abdominal pain	Extreme sensitivity to light and sound	|Read labels carefully and use only the dosages recommended for your child.	Don't give doses more frequently than recommended.	Don't give your child OTC pain medication more than two or three days a week. Daily use can trigger a rebound headache, a type of headache caused by overuse of pain medications.	Use caution when giving aspirin to children or teenagers. Though aspirin is approved for use in children older than age 2, children and teenagers recovering from chickenpox or flu-like symptoms should never take aspirin. This is because aspirin has been linked to Reye's syndrome, a rare but potentially life-threatening condition, in such children. Talk to your doctor if you have concerns. 	
Hearing loss|Muffling of speech and other sounds	Difficulty understanding words, especially against background noise or in a crowd of people	Trouble hearing consonants	Frequently asking others to speak more slowly, clearly and loudly	Needing to turn up the volume of the television or radio	Withdrawal from conversations	Avoidance of some social settings	|
Heart arrhythmias|A fluttering in your chest	A racing heartbeat (tachycardia)	A slow heartbeat (bradycardia)	Chest pain	Shortness of breath	Lightheadedness	Dizziness	Fainting (syncope) or near fainting	|Eat heart-healthy foods. Eat a healthy diet that's low in salt and solid fats and rich in fruits, vegetables and whole grains.	Exercise regularly. Exercise daily and increase your physical activity.	Quit smoking. If you smoke and can't quit on your own, talk to your doctor about strategies or programs to help you break a smoking habit.	Maintain a healthy weight. Being overweight increases your risk of developing heart disease.	Keep blood pressure and cholesterol levels under control. Make lifestyle changes and take medications as prescribed to correct high blood pressure (hypertension) or high cholesterol.	Drink alcohol in moderation. For healthy adults, that means up to one drink a day for women of all ages and men older than age 65, and up to two drinks a day for men age 65 and younger.	Maintain follow-up care. Take your medications as prescribed and have regular follow-up appointments with your doctor. Tell your doctor if your symptoms worsen.	
Heart attack|Pressure, tightness, pain, or a squeezing or aching sensation in your chest or arms that may spread to your neck, jaw or back	Nausea, indigestion, heartburn or abdominal pain	Shortness of breath	Cold sweat	Fatigue	Lightheadedness or sudden dizziness	|Avoid smoke. The most important thing you can do to improve your heart's health is to not smoke. Also, avoid being around secondhand smoke. If you need to quit, ask your doctor for help.	Control your blood pressure and cholesterol levels. If one or both of these is high, your doctor can prescribe changes to your diet and medications. Ask your doctor how often you need to have your blood pressure and cholesterol levels monitored.	Get regular medical checkups. Some of the major risk factors for heart attack — high blood cholesterol, high blood pressure and diabetes — cause no symptoms early on. Your doctor can perform tests to check for these conditions and help you manage them, if necessary.	Exercise regularly. Regular exercise helps improve heart muscle function after a heart attack and helps prevent a heart attack by helping you to control your weight, diabetes, cholesterol and blood pressure. Exercise needn't be vigorous. Walking 30 minutes a day, five days a week can improve your health.	Maintain a healthy weight. Excess weight strains your heart and can contribute to high cholesterol, high blood pressure and diabetes.	Eat a heart-healthy diet. Saturated fat, trans fats and cholesterol in your diet can narrow arteries to your heart, and too much salt can raise blood pressure. Eat a heart-healthy diet that includes lean proteins, such as fish and beans, plenty of fruits and vegetables and whole grains.	Manage diabetes. High blood sugar is damaging to your heart. Regular exercise, eating well and losing weight all help to keep blood sugar levels at more-desirable levels. Many people also need medication to manage their diabetes.	Control stress. Reduce stress in your day-to-day activities. Rethink workaholic habits and find healthy ways to minimize or deal with stressful events in your life.	If you drink alcohol, do so in moderation. For healthy adults, that means up to one drink a day for women and men older than age 65, and up to two drinks a day for men age 65 and younger.	
Heart disease|Chest pain (angina)	Shortness of breath	Pain, numbness, weakness or coldness in your legs or arms if the blood vessels in those parts of your body are narrowed	Pain in the neck, jaw, throat, upper abdomen or back	|Stop smoking. Smoking is a major risk factor for heart disease, especially atherosclerosis. Quitting is the best way to reduce your risk of heart disease and its complications.	Control your blood pressure. Ask your doctor for a blood pressure measurement at least every two years. He or she may recommend more frequent measurements if your blood pressure is higher than normal or you have a history of heart disease. Optimal blood pressure is less than 120 systolic and 80 diastolic, as measured in millimeters of mercury (mm Hg).	 Check your cholesterol. Ask your doctor for a baseline cholesterol test when you're in your 20s and then at least every five years. You may need to start testing earlier if high cholesterol is in your family. If your test results aren't within desirable ranges, your doctor may recommend more frequent measurements. Most people should aim for an LDL level below 130 milligrams per deciliter (mg/dL), or 3.4 millimoles per liter (mmol/L). If you have other risk factors for heart disease, you should aim for an LDL below 100 mg/dL (2.6 mmol/L). If you're at very high risk of heart disease — if you've already had a heart attack or have diabetes, for example — aim for an even lower LDL level — below 70 mg/dL (1.8 mmol/L). 	Keep diabetes under control. If you have diabetes, tight blood sugar control can help reduce the risk of heart disease.	 Move. Exercise helps you achieve and maintain a healthy weight and control diabetes, elevated cholesterol and high blood pressure — all risk factors for heart disease. If you have a heart arrhythmia or heart defect, there may be some restrictions on the activities you can do, so talk to your doctor. With your doctor's OK, aim for 30 to 60 minutes of physical activity most days of the week. 	Eat healthy foods. A heart-healthy diet based on fruits, vegetables and whole grains — and low in saturated fat, cholesterol, sodium and added sugar — can help you control your weight, blood pressure and cholesterol.	Maintain a healthy weight. Being overweight increases your risk of heart disease. A BMI of less than 25 and a waist circumference of 35 inches (88.9 centimeters) or less is the goal for preventing and treating heart disease.	Manage stress. Reduce stress as much as possible. Practice techniques for managing stress, such as muscle relaxation and deep breathing.	Deal with depression. Being depressed can increase your risk of heart disease significantly. Talk to your doctor if you feel hopeless or uninterested in your life.	Practice good hygiene. Stay away from people with infectious diseases such as colds, get vaccinated against the flu, regularly wash your hands, and brush and floss your teeth regularly to keep yourself well.	
Heart failure|Shortness of breath (dyspnea) when you exert yourself or when you lie down	Fatigue and weakness	Swelling (edema) in your legs, ankles and feet	Rapid or irregular heartbeat	Reduced ability to exercise	Persistent cough or wheezing with white or pink blood-tinged phlegm	Increased need to urinate at night	Swelling of your abdomen (ascites)	Sudden weight gain from fluid retention	Lack of appetite and nausea	Difficulty concentrating or decreased alertness	Sudden, severe shortness of breath and coughing up pink, foamy mucus	Chest pain if your heart failure is caused by a heart attack	| Stop smoking. Smoking damages your blood vessels, raises blood pressure, reduces the amount of oxygen in your blood and makes your heart beat faster. If you smoke, ask your doctor to recommend a program to help you quit. You can't be considered for a heart transplant if you continue to smoke. Avoid secondhand smoke, too. 	Discuss weight monitoring with your doctor. Discuss with your doctor how often you should weigh yourself. Ask your doctor how much weight gain you should notify him or her about. Weight gain may mean that you're retaining fluids and need a change in your treatment plan.	Check your legs, ankles and feet for swelling daily. Check for any changes in swelling in your legs, ankles or feet daily. Check with your doctor if the swelling worsens.	Eat a healthy diet. Aim to eat a diet that includes fruits and vegetables, whole grains, fat-free or low-fat dairy products, and lean proteins. 	 Restrict salt in your diet. Too much sodium contributes to water retention, which makes your heart work harder and causes shortness of breath and swollen legs, ankles and feet. Check with your doctor for the sodium restriction recommended for you. Keep in mind that salt is already added to prepared foods, and be careful when using salt substitutes. 	Maintain a healthy weight. If you're overweight, your dietitian will help you work toward your ideal weight. Even losing a small amount of weight can help.	Consider getting vaccinations. If you have heart failure, you may want to get influenza and pneumonia vaccinations. Ask your doctor about these vaccinations. 	Limit fats and cholesterol. In addition to avoiding high-sodium foods, limit the amount of saturated fat, trans fat and cholesterol in your diet. A diet high in fat and cholesterol is a risk factor for coronary artery disease, which often underlies or contributes to heart failure.	 Limit alcohol and fluids. Your doctor likely will recommend that you don't drink alcohol if you have heart failure, since it can interact with your medication, weaken your heart muscle and increase your risk of abnormal heart rhythms. If you have severe heart failure, your doctor may also suggest you limit the amount of fluids you drink. 	 Be active. Moderate aerobic activity helps keep the rest of your body healthy and conditioned, reducing the demands on your heart muscle. Before you start exercising though, talk to your doctor about an exercise program that's right for you. Your doctor may suggest a walking program. Check with your local hospital to see if it offers a cardiac rehabilitation program; if it does, talk to your doctor about enrolling in the program. 	 Reduce stress. When you're anxious or upset, your heart beats faster, you breathe more heavily and your blood pressure often goes up. This can make heart failure worse, since your heart is already having trouble meeting the body's demands. Find ways to reduce stress in your life. To give your heart a rest, try napping or putting your feet up when possible. Spend time with friends and family to be social and help keep stress at bay. 	 Sleep easy. If you're having shortness of breath, especially at night, sleep with your head propped up using a pillow or a wedge. If you snore or have had other sleep problems, make sure you get tested for sleep apnea. To improve your sleep at night, prop up your head with pillows. Also, discuss with your doctor changing the time for taking medications, especially diuretics. Taking diuretics earlier in the day may decrease the need to urinate as often during the night. 	
Heart murmurs|Skin that appears blue, especially on your fingertips and lips	Swelling or sudden weight gain	Shortness of breath	Chronic cough	Enlarged liver	Enlarged neck veins	Poor appetite and failure to grow normally (in infants)	Heavy sweating with minimal or no exertion	Chest pain	Dizziness	Fainting	|
Heart palpitations|Skipping beats	Fluttering	Beating too fast	Pumping harder than usual	|Reduce stress or anxiety. Try relaxation techniques, such as meditation, yoga, or deep breathing or aromatherapy.	Avoid stimulants. Stimulants, including caffeine, nicotine, some cold medicines and energy drinks, can make your heart beat quickly or irregularly.	Avoid illegal drugs. Certain drugs, such as cocaine and amphetamines, can bring on heart palpitations.	
Heart valve disease|Aortic valve disease	Mitral valve disease	Pulmonary valve disease	Tricuspid valve disease	|Aortic valve disease	Mitral valve disease	Pulmonary valve disease	Tricuspid valve disease	
Heartburn|A burning pain in the chest that usually occurs after eating and may occur at night	Pain that worsens when lying down or bending over	|Maintain a healthy weight. Excess pounds put pressure on your abdomen, pushing up your stomach and causing acid to back up into your esophagus.	Avoid tightfitting clothing, which puts pressure on your abdomen and the lower esophageal sphincter.	Avoid foods that trigger your heartburn.	Avoid lying down after a meal. Wait at least three hours.	Avoid late meals.	Elevate the head of your bed if you regularly experience heartburn at night or while trying to sleep. If that's not possible, insert a wedge between your mattress and box spring to elevate your body from the waist up. Raising your head with additional pillows usually isn't effective.	Avoid smoking. Smoking decreases the lower esophageal sphincter's ability to function properly.	
Heat exhaustion|Cool, moist skin with goose bumps when in the heat	Heavy sweating	Faintness	Dizziness	Fatigue	Weak, rapid pulse	Low blood pressure upon standing	Muscle cramps	Nausea	Headache	|
Heat rash|The mildest form of heat rash (miliaria crystallina) affects the sweat ducts in the top layer of skin. This form is marked by clear, fluid-filled blisters and bumps (papules) that break easily.	A type that occurs deeper in the skin (miliaria rubra) is sometimes called prickly heat. Signs and symptoms include red bumps and itching or prickling in the affected area.	Occasionally, the fluid-containing sacs (vesicles) of miliaria rubra become inflamed and pus-filled (pustular). This form is called miliaria pustulosa.	A less common form of heat rash (miliaria profunda) affects the dermis, a deeper layer of skin. Retained sweat leaks out of the sweat gland into the skin, causing firm, flesh-colored lesions that resemble goose bumps.	|In hot weather, dress in loose, lightweight clothing that wicks moisture away from your skin.	Spend as much time as possible in air-conditioned buildings.	Bathe or shower in cool water with nondrying soap, then let your skin air-dry instead of toweling off.	Use calamine lotion or cool compresses to calm itchy, irritated skin.	Avoid using creams and ointments that contain petroleum or mineral oil, which can block pores further.	
Heatstroke|High body temperature. A body temperature of 104 F (40 C) or higher is the main sign of heatstroke.	Altered mental state or behavior. Confusion, agitation, slurred speech, irritability, delirium, seizures and coma can all result from heatstroke.	Alteration in sweating. In heatstroke brought on by hot weather, your skin will feel hot and dry to the touch. However, in heatstroke brought on by strenuous exercise, your skin may feel moist.	Nausea and vomiting. You may feel sick to your stomach or vomit.	Flushed skin. Your skin may turn red as your body temperature increases.	Rapid breathing. Your breathing may become rapid and shallow.	Racing heart rate. Your pulse may significantly increase because heat stress places a tremendous burden on your heart to help cool your body.	Headache. Your head may throb.	|Get to a shady or air-conditioned place. If you don't have air conditioning at home, go someplace with air conditioning, such as the mall, movie theater or public library.	Cool off with damp sheets and a fan. If you're with someone who's experiencing heat-related symptoms, cool the person by covering him or her with damp sheets or by spraying with cool water. Direct air onto the person with a fan.	Take a cool shower or bath. If you're outdoors and not near shelter, soaking in a cool pond or stream can help bring your temperature down.	Rehydrate. Drink plenty of fluids. Also, because you lose salt through sweating, you can replenish salt and water with some sports drinks. If your doctor has restricted your fluid or salt intake, check with him or her to see how much you should drink and whether you should replace salt.	Don't drink sugary or alcoholic beverages to rehydrate. These drinks may interfere with your body's ability to control your temperature. Also, very cold drinks can cause stomach cramps.	
Hemolytic uremic syndrome (HUS)|Bloody diarrhea 	Vomiting 	Abdominal pain 	Pale skin tone 	Fatigue and irritability 	Fever, usually not high and may not be present at all 	Blood in the urine 	Small, unexplained bruises or bleeding from the nose and mouth 	Decreased urination or blood in the urine 	Swelling of the face, hands, feet or entire body 	Confusion 	|
Hemophilia|Unexplained and excessive bleeding from cuts or injuries, or after surgery or dental work	Many large or deep bruises	Unusual bleeding after vaccinations	Pain, swelling or tightness in your joints	Blood in your urine or stool	Nosebleeds without a known cause	In infants, unexplained irritability	|Exercise regularly. Activities such as swimming, bicycle riding and walking can build up muscles while protecting joints. Contact sports — such as football, hockey or wrestling — are not safe for people with hemophilia.	Avoid certain pain medications. Drugs that can aggravate bleeding include aspirin and ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin, others). Instead, use acetaminophen (Tylenol, others), which is a safe alternative for mild pain relief.	Avoid blood-thinning medications. Medications that prevent blood from clotting include heparin, warfarin (Coumadin), clopidogrel (Plavix) and prasugrel (Effient).	Practice good dental hygiene. The goal is to prevent tooth extraction, which can lead to excessive bleeding.	Protect your child from injuries that could cause bleeding. Kneepads, elbow pads, helmets and safety belts all may help prevent injuries from falls and other accidents. Keep your home free of furniture with sharp corners.	
Hemorrhoids|Painless bleeding during bowel movements — you might notice small amounts of bright red blood on your toilet tissue or in the toilet bowl	Itching or irritation in your anal region	Pain or discomfort	Swelling around your anus	A lump near your anus, which may be sensitive or painful	Leakage of feces	|Use topical treatments. Apply an over-the-counter hemorrhoid cream or suppository containing hydrocortisone, or use pads containing witch hazel or a numbing agent.	Soak regularly in a warm bath or sitz bath. Soak your anal area in plain warm water 10 to 15 minutes two to three times a day. A sitz bath fits over the toilet. You can get one at most drugstores.	Keep the anal area clean. Bathe (preferably) or shower daily to cleanse the skin around your anus gently with warm water. Soap isn't necessary and may aggravate the problem. Avoid alcohol based or perfumed wipes. Gently dry the area with a hair dryer after bathing.	Don't use dry toilet paper. To help keep the anal area clean after a bowel movement, use moist towelettes or wet toilet paper that doesn't contain perfume or alcohol.	Apply cold. Apply ice packs or cold compresses on your anus to relieve swelling.	Take oral pain relievers. You can use acetaminophen (Tylenol, others), aspirin or ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin IB, others) temporarily to help relieve your discomfort.	
Henoch-Schonlein purpura|Rash (purpura). Reddish-purple spots, which look like bruises, are the most distinctive and universal sign of Henoch-Schonlein purpura. The rash develops mainly on the buttocks, legs and feet, but it can also appear on the arms, face and trunk and may be worse in areas of pressure, such as the sock line and waistline. 	Swollen, sore joints (arthritis). People with Henoch-Schonlein purpura often have painful, swollen joints — mainly in the knees and ankles. Joint pain sometimes precedes the classical rash by one or two days. These symptoms subside when the disease clears and leave no lasting damage. 	Gastrointestinal symptoms. Many children with Henoch-Schonlein purpura develop gastrointestinal symptoms, such as abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting or bloody stools. These symptoms sometimes occur before the rash appears. 	Kidney involvement. Henoch-Schonlein purpura can also affect the kidneys. In most cases, this shows up as protein or blood in the urine, which you may not even know is there unless you have a urine test done. Usually this goes away once the illness passes, but in a few cases, kidney disease may develop and even persist. 	|Treatments and drugs	
Hepatitis A|Fatigue	Nausea and vomiting	Abdominal pain or discomfort, especially in the area of your liver on your right side beneath your lower ribs	Clay-colored bowel movements	Loss of appetite	Low-grade fever	Dark urine	Joint pain	Yellowing of the skin and eyes (jaundice)	|Avoid sexual activity. Avoid all sexual activity if you have hepatitis A, since many kinds of sexual activity can expose your partner to infection. Condoms don't offer adequate protection.	Wash your hands thoroughly after using the toilet. Scrub vigorously for at least 20 seconds and rinse well. Dry your hands with a disposable towel.	Don't prepare food for others while you're actively infected. You can easily pass the infection to others.	
Hepatitis B|Abdominal pain	Dark urine	Fever	Joint pain	Loss of appetite	Nausea and vomiting	Weakness and fatigue	Yellowing of your skin and the whites of your eyes (jaundice)	|Make sex safer. If you're sexually active, tell your partner you have HBV and talk about the risk of transmitting it to him or her. Use a new latex condom every time you have sex, but remember that condoms reduce but don't eliminate the risk.	Tell your sexual partner to get tested. Anyone with whom you've had sex needs to be tested for the virus. Your partners also need to know their HBV status so that they don't infect others.	Don't share implements. If you use IV drugs, never share needles and syringes. And don't share razor blades or toothbrushes, which may carry traces of infected blood.	
Hepatitis C|Fatigue	Nausea or poor appetite	Stomach pain	Dark-colored urine	Yellow discoloration in the skin and eyes (jaundice)	Fever	Muscle and joint pains	|Stop drinking alcohol. Alcohol speeds the progression of liver disease.	Avoid medications that may cause liver damage. Review your medications with your doctor, including the over-the-counter medications you take as well as herbal preparations and dietary supplements. Your doctor may recommend avoiding certain medications.	Help prevent others from coming in contact with your blood. Cover any wounds you have and don't share razors or toothbrushes. Don't donate blood, body organs or semen, and advise health care workers that you have the virus.	
Hiatal hernia|Heartburn	Belching	Difficulty swallowing	Chest or abdominal pain	Feeling especially full after meals	Vomiting blood or passing black stools, which may indicate gastrointestinal bleeding	|Eat several smaller meals throughout the day rather than a few large meals.	Avoid foods that trigger heartburn, such as chocolate, onions, spicy foods, citrus fruits and tomato-based foods.	Avoid alcohol.	Eat at least two to three hours before bedtime.	Lose weight if you're overweight or obese.	Stop smoking.	Elevate the head of your bed 6 inches (about 15 centimeters).	
Herniated disk|Arm or leg pain. If your herniated disk is in your lower back, you'll typically feel the most intense pain in your buttocks, thigh and calf. It may also involve part of the foot. If your herniated disk is in your neck, the pain will typically be most intense in the shoulder and arm. This pain may shoot into your arm or leg when you cough, sneeze or move your spine into certain positions.	Numbness or tingling. People who have a herniated disk often experience numbness or tingling in the body part served by the affected nerves.	Weakness. Muscles served by the affected nerves tend to weaken. This may cause you to stumble, or impair your ability to lift or hold items.	|Take pain relievers. Over-the-counter medications — such as ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin IB, others) or naproxen (Aleve, others) — may help reduce the pain associated with a herniated disk.	Use heat or cold. Initially, cold packs can be used to relieve pain and inflammation. After a few days, you may switch to gentle heat to give relief and comfort.	Avoid too much bed rest. Too much bed rest can lead to stiff joints and weak muscles — which can complicate your recovery. Instead, rest in a position of comfort for 30 minutes, and then go for a short walk or do some work. Try to avoid activities that worsen your pain during the healing process.	
Hiccups||Breathe into a paper bag	Gargle with ice water	Hold your breath	Sip cold water	
Hidradenitis suppurativa|Blackheads. Small pitted areas of skin containing blackheads — often appearing in pairs or a "double-barreled" pattern — are a common feature. 	Red, tender bumps. These bumps, or lesions, often enlarge, break open and drain pus. The drainage may have an unpleasant odor. Itching, burning and excessive sweating may accompany the bumps. 	Painful, pea-sized lumps. These hard lumps, which develop under the skin, may persist for years, enlarge and become inflamed. 	Leaking bumps or sores. These open wounds heal very slowly, if at all, often leading to scarring and the development of tunnels under the skin. 	|Apply warm compresses. A warm washcloth or compress can help reduce swelling. 	Keep the affected area clean. Gently wash the affected areas with antibacterial soap. After washing, apply an over-the-counter antibiotic. 	Wear loosefitting clothes. Loose clothes and underwear can help prevent skin irritation, while tight, synthetic clothes may irritate your skin. 	Lose weight. Excess weight increases the number of areas where skin rubs together — for example, between skin folds — causing friction, increased perspiration and bacterial growth. Though weight loss won't cure the disease, it may improve symptoms. 	
High blood pressure (hypertension)||Eat healthy foods. Eat a healthy diet. Try the Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension (DASH) diet, which emphasizes fruits, vegetables, whole grains, poultry, fish and low-fat dairy foods. Get plenty of potassium, which can help prevent and control high blood pressure. Eat less saturated fat and trans fat.	 Decrease the salt in your diet. A lower sodium level — 1,500 milligrams (mg) a day — is appropriate for people 51 years of age or older, and individuals of any age who are black or who have hypertension, diabetes or chronic kidney disease. Otherwise healthy people can aim for 2,300 mg a day or less. While you can reduce the amount of salt you eat by putting down the saltshaker, you generally should also pay attention to the amount of salt that's in the processed foods you eat, such as canned soups or frozen dinners. 	Maintain a healthy weight. Keeping a healthy weight, or losing weight if you're overweight or obese, can help you control your high blood pressure and lower your risk of related health problems. If you're overweight, losing even 5 pounds (2.3 kilograms) can lower your blood pressure.	 Increase physical activity. Regular physical activity can help lower your blood pressure, manage stress, reduce your risk of several health problems and keep your weight under control. For most healthy adults, the Department of Health and Human Services recommends that you get at least 150 minutes a week of moderate aerobic activity or 75 minutes a week of vigorous aerobic activity, or a combination or moderate and vigorous activity. Aim to do muscle-strengthening exercises at least two days a week. 	Limit alcohol. Even if you're healthy, alcohol can raise your blood pressure. If you choose to drink alcohol, do so in moderation. For healthy adults, that means up to one drink a day for women of all ages and men older than age 65, and up to two drinks a day for men age 65 and younger. One drink equals 12 ounces of beer, 5 ounces of wine or 1.5 ounces of 80-proof liquor.	Don't smoke. Tobacco injures blood vessel walls and speeds up the process of hardening of the arteries. If you smoke, ask your doctor to help you quit.	Manage stress. Reduce stress as much as possible. Practice healthy coping techniques, such as muscle relaxation, deep breathing or meditation. Getting regular physical activity and plenty of sleep can help, too.	 Monitor your blood pressure at home. Home blood pressure monitoring can help you keep closer tabs on your blood pressure, show if medication is working, and even alert you and your doctor to potential complications. Home blood pressure monitoring isn't a substitute for visits to your doctor, and home blood pressure monitors may have some limitations. Even if you get normal readings, don't stop or change your medications or alter your diet without talking to your doctor first. If your blood pressure is under control, you may be able to make fewer visits to your doctor if you monitor your blood pressure at home. 	Practice relaxation or slow, deep breathing. Practice taking deep, slow breaths to help relax. There are some devices available that promote slow, deep breathing. However, it's questionable whether these devices have a significant effect on lowering your blood pressure.	Control blood pressure during pregnancy. If you're a woman with high blood pressure, discuss with your doctor how to control your blood pressure during pregnancy.	
High blood pressure in children||Control your child's weight. If your child is overweight, losing the excess pounds or maintaining the same weight as he or she gets taller can lower blood pressure.	 Give your child a healthy diet. Encourage your child to eat a healthy breakfast that includes fiber and to avoid sugary cereals and beverages or products that have corn syrup solids listed as the first ingredient. Provide plenty of fresh fruits and vegetables in place of higher fat snacks like candy or chips. Trade white bread, rice and pasta for whole-wheat varieties. Working with a dietitian can be helpful. 	 Decrease salt in your child's diet. Cutting the amount of salt (sodium) in your child's diet will help lower his or her blood pressure. Children ages 4 to 8 shouldn't have more than 1,200 milligrams (mg) a day, and older children shouldn't have more than 1,500 mg a day. Pay attention to how much salt you use in your cooking, and take the saltshaker off the table. Avoid giving your child salty snacks, such as chips or pretzels. Also, pay attention to how much sodium is in canned and processed foods your child eats, such as soups and frozen dinners. Limit the amount of fast food your child eats. Fast-food restaurants generally have high-salt menus as well as high-calorie foods. 	Encourage physical activity. Most children need at least 30 to 60 minutes of physical activity a day. Limit your child's time in front of the television or computer — no television before age 2, and no more than two hours of "screen time" a day after age 2.	Get the whole family involved. It may be hard for your child to make healthy lifestyle changes if you or your child's siblings don't eat a healthy diet or exercise. So, set a good example. Your whole family will benefit from eating a healthier diet. You can also join in the fun of riding your bikes together, playing catch or walking to the park as a family.	Shop mindfully. Most of the time, your child can eat only the foods that you've purchased and made available. So, as the parent, bring healthy foods into your home and keep unhealthy foods out.	
Hip fracture|Inability to move immediately after a fall	Severe pain in your hip or groin	Inability to put weight on your leg on the side of your injured hip	Stiffness, bruising and swelling in and around your hip area	Shorter leg on the side of your injured hip	Turning outward of your leg on the side of your injured hip	|
Hip labral tear|A locking, clicking or catching sensation in your hip joint	Pain in your hip or groin	Stiffness or limited range of motion in your hip joint	|
Hirschsprung's disease|Swollen belly 	Vomiting, including vomiting a green or brown substance 	Constipation or gas, which might make a newborn fussy 	Diarrhea 	|Serve high-fiber foods. If your child eats solid foods, include high-fiber foods as part of your child's diet. For instance, offer whole grains, such as whole-wheat bread. Reduce servings of refined grains, such as white bread. Encourage your child to eat fruits and vegetables. Cut down on fatty animal-source foods, such as meat and butter. Be aware, though, that a sudden increase in high-fiber foods can make constipation worse — so add high-fiber foods to your child's diet slowly. If your child isn't eating solid foods yet, ask the doctor about formulas that might help relieve constipation. 	Increase fluids. Encourage your child to drink more water. One of the colon's jobs is to absorb water from food in the last stages of digestion. If a portion of your child's colon was removed, your child may have trouble absorbing enough water. Drinking more water can help your child stay hydrated, which may help ease constipation. 	Encourage physical activity. Daily aerobic activity helps promote regular bowel movements. 	Ask your child's doctor about laxatives. Certain laxatives — medications to encourage bowel movements — might help relieve constipation. Ask the doctor about the risks and benefits of laxatives for your child. 	
Hirsutism|Deepening voice	Balding	Acne	Decrease in breast size	Enlargement of the clitoris	|Plucking. Using tweezers is a good method to remove a few stray hairs, but is not useful for removing a large area of hair.	Shaving. Shaving is quick and inexpensive, but it needs to be repeated regularly since it removes the hair only down to the surface of your skin.	Waxing. Waxing involves applying warm wax on your skin where the unwanted hair grows. Once the wax hardens, it's pulled back from your skin against the direction of hair growth, removing hair. Waxing removes hair from a large area quickly, but it may sting temporarily and sometimes causes skin irritation and redness.	Chemical depilatories. Generally available as gels, lotions or creams that you spread on your skin, chemical depilatories work by breaking down the protein structure of the hair shaft. Some people are allergic to the chemicals used in depilatories.	
Histoplasmosis|Fever	Chills	Headache	Muscle aches	Dry cough	Chest discomfort	|
HIV/AIDS|Fever	Headache	Muscle aches and joint pain	Rash	Sore throat	Swollen lymph glands, mainly on the neck	|Eat healthy foods. Emphasize fresh fruits and vegetables, whole grains, and lean protein. Healthy foods help keep you strong, give you more energy and support your immune system.	Avoid certain foods. Foodborne illnesses can be especially severe in people who are infected with HIV. Avoid unpasteurized dairy products, raw eggs and raw seafood such as oysters, sushi or sashimi. Cook meat until it's well-done.	Get immunizations. These may prevent infections such as pneumonia and the flu. Make sure the vaccines don't contain live viruses, which can be dangerous for people with weakened immune systems.	Take care with companion animals. Some animals may carry parasites that can cause infections in people who are HIV-positive. Cat feces can cause toxoplasmosis, reptiles can carry salmonella, and birds can carry the fungus cryptococcus or histoplasmosis. Wash hands thoroughly after handling pets or emptying the litter box.	
Hives and angioedema|Red or flesh-colored	Intensely itchy	Roughly oval or shaped like a worm	A few millimeters to several inches across	|Avoid triggers. These can include foods, medications, pollen, pet dander, latex and insect stings.	Use an over-the-counter antihistamine. A nonprescription oral antihistamine, such as loratadine (Claritin), cetirizine (Zyrtec) or diphenhydramine (Benadryl, others), may help relieve itching.	Apply cool, wet compresses. Covering the affected area with bandages and dressings can help soothe the skin and prevent scratching.	Take a comfortably cool bath. To relieve itching, sprinkle the bath water with baking soda, uncooked oatmeal or colloidal oatmeal — a finely ground oatmeal that is made for the bathtub (Aveeno, others).	Wear loose, smooth-textured cotton clothing. Avoid clothing that's rough, tight, scratchy or made from wool. This will help you avoid irritation.	
Hoarding disorder|Persistent inability to part with any possession, regardless of its value	Excessive attachment to possessions, including discomfort letting others touch or borrow them or distress at the idea of letting an item go	Cluttered living spaces, making areas of the home unusable for the intended purpose, such as not being able to cook in the kitchen or use the bathroom to bathe	Keeping stacks of newspapers, magazines or junk mail	Letting food or trash build up to unusually excessive, unsanitary levels	Acquiring unneeded or seemingly useless items, such as trash or napkins from a restaurant	Difficulty managing daily activities because of procrastination and trouble making decisions	Moving items from one pile to another, without discarding anything	Difficulty organizing items, sometimes losing important items in the clutter	Shame or embarrassment	Limited or no social interactions	|Stick to your treatment plan. It's hard work, and it's normal to have some setbacks over time. But treatment can help you feel better about yourself and reduce your hoarding. 	Try to keep up personal hygiene and bathing. If you have possessions piled in your tub or shower, resolve to move them so that you can bathe.	Make sure you're getting proper nutrition. If you can't use your stove or reach your refrigerator, you may not be eating properly. Try to clear those areas so that you can prepare nutritious meals.	Reach out to others. Hoarding can lead to isolation and loneliness, which in turn can lead to more hoarding. If you don't want visitors in your house, try to get out to see friends and family. Support groups for people with hoarding disorder can let you know that you are not alone and help you learn about your behavior and resources. 	Look out for yourself. Remind yourself that you don't have to live in chaos and distress — that you deserve better.	Take small steps. With a professional's help, you can tackle one area at a time. Small wins like this can lead to big wins. 	Focus on your goals. To keep motivated to declutter, focus on your goals — living a healthier and more enjoyable life.	Do what's best for your pets. If the number of pets you have has grown beyond your ability to care for them properly, remind yourself that they deserve to live healthy and happy lives — and that's not possible if you can't provide them with proper nutrition, sanitation and veterinary care.	Accept assistance. Local resources, professional organizers and loved ones can work with you to make decisions about how best to organize and unclutter your home and to stay safe and healthy. 	
Hodgkin's lymphoma|Painless swelling of lymph nodes in your neck, armpits or groin	Persistent fatigue	Fever and chills	Night sweats	Unexplained weight loss — as much as 10 percent or more of your body weight	Loss of appetite	Itching	Increased sensitivity to the effects of alcohol or pain in your lymph nodes after drinking alcohol	|
Horner syndrome|A persistently small pupil (miosis)	A notable difference in pupil size between the two eyes (anisocoria)	Little or delayed opening (dilation) of the affected pupil in dim light	Drooping of the upper eyelid (ptosis)	Slight elevation of the lower lid, sometimes called upside-down ptosis	Little or no sweating (anhidrosis) either on the entire side of the face or an isolated patch of skin on the affected side	|
Hot flashes|A sudden feeling of warmth spreading through your upper body and face	A flushed appearance with red, blotchy skin	Rapid heartbeat	Perspiration, mostly on your upper body	Feeling chilled as the hot flash subsides	|Keep cool. Slight increases in your body's core temperature can trigger hot flashes. Dress in layers so that you can remove clothing when you feel warm. Open windows or use a fan or air conditioner. Lower the room temperature, if you can. If you feel a hot flash coming on, sip a cold drink.	Watch what you eat and drink. Hot and spicy foods, caffeinated beverages, and alcohol can trigger hot flashes. Learn to recognize your triggers and avoid them.	Relax. Some women find relief from mild hot flashes through meditation; slow, deep breathing; or other stress-reducing techniques. Even if these approaches don't quell your hot flashes, they may provide other benefits, such as easing sleep disturbances that tend to occur with menopause.	Don't smoke. Smoking is linked to increased hot flashes. By not smoking, you may reduce hot flashes, as well as your risk of many serious health conditions, such as heart disease, stroke and cancer.	Lose weight. If you're overweight or obese, losing weight might help ease your hot flashes.	
HPV infection| Genital warts. Genital warts may appear as flat lesions, small cauliflower-like bumps or tiny stem-like protrusions. In women, genital warts appear most commonly on the vulva but may also occur near the anus, on the cervix or in the vagina. In men, genital warts may appear on the penis and scrotum or around the anus. Genital warts rarely cause discomfort or pain, though they may itch. 	Common warts. Common warts appear as rough, raised bumps that usually occur on the hands, fingers or elbows. In most cases, common warts are simply a nuisance because of their appearance, but they may also be painful or susceptible to injury or bleeding.	Plantar warts. Plantar warts are hard, grainy growths that usually appear on the heels or balls of your feet, areas that feel the most pressure. These warts may cause discomfort or pain.	Flat warts. Flat warts are flat-topped, slightly raised lesions darker than your regular skin color. They usually appear on your face, neck or on areas that have been scratched. HPV infections that cause flat warts usually affect children, adolescents and young adults.	|
Huntington's disease|Involuntary jerking or writhing movements (chorea)	Muscle problems, such as rigidity or muscle contracture (dystonia)	Slow or abnormal eye movements	Impaired gait, posture and balance	Difficulty with the physical production of speech or swallowing	|People with Huntington's disease often have difficulty maintaining a healthy body weight. Difficulty eating, higher caloric needs due to physical exertion or unknown metabolic problems may be the cause. To get adequate nutrition, more than three meals a day may be necessary.	Difficulty with chewing, swallowing and fine motor skills can limit the amount of food you eat and increase the risk of choking. Problems may be minimized by removing distractions during a meal and selecting foods that are easier to eat. Utensils designed for people with limited fine motor skills and covered cups with straws or drinking spouts also can help.	
Hurthle cell cancer|A fast-growing lump in your neck, just below your Adam's apple	Pain in your neck or throat	Hoarseness or other changes in your voice	Shortness of breath	Swallowing difficulty	|
Hydrocephalus|An unusually large head	A rapid increase in the size of the head	A bulging or tense soft spot (fontanel) on the top of the head	|
Hypercalcemia|Kidneys. Excess calcium in your blood means your kidneys have to work harder to filter it out. This can cause excessive thirst and frequent urination.	Digestive system. Hypercalcemia can cause stomach upset, nausea, vomiting and constipation.	Bones and muscles. In most cases, the excess calcium in your blood was leached from your bones, which weakens them. This can cause bone pain. Some people who have hypercalcemia also experience muscle weakness.	Brain. Hypercalcemia can interfere with the way your brain works, resulting in confusion, lethargy and fatigue.	|Drink plenty of fluids, especially water. Drinking fluids can help keep you from dehydration and help prevent kidney stones from forming.	Exercise. Once your calcium levels return to normal, and if you're otherwise healthy, it's important to remain active to help maintain bone density. Try to combine strength training with weight-bearing exercises.	Don't smoke. Smoking has been shown to increase bone loss as well as dramatically increase your risk of a number of serious health problems. Talk to your doctor about the best ways to quit.	
Hyperglycemia in diabetes|Frequent urination	Increased thirst	Blurred vision	Fatigue	Headache	|
Hyperhidrosis|Chills	Lightheadedness	Chest pain	Nausea	A body temperature of 104 F (40 C) or higher	|Use antiperspirant. Nonprescription antiperspirants contain aluminum-based compounds that temporarily block the sweat pore. This reduces the amount of sweat that reaches your skin. This type of product may help with minor hyperhidrosis.	Bathe daily. Regular bathing helps keep the number of bacteria on your skin in check. Dry yourself thoroughly, especially between the toes and under the arms.	Choose shoes and socks made of natural materials. Shoes made of natural materials, such as leather, can help prevent sweaty feet by allowing your feet to breathe. When you're active, moisture-wicking athletic socks are a good choice.	Rotate your shoes. Shoes won't completely dry overnight, so try not to wear the same pair two days in a row.	Change your socks often. Change socks or hose once or twice a day, drying your feet thoroughly each time. You may want to try pantyhose with cotton soles. Use over-the-counter foot powders to help absorb sweat.	Air your feet. Go barefoot when you can, or at least slip out of your shoes now and then.	Choose clothing to suit your activity. Generally, wear natural fabrics, such as cotton, wool and silk, which allow your skin to breathe. When you exercise, you might prefer fabrics designed to wick moisture away from your skin.	Try relaxation techniques. Consider relaxation techniques such as yoga, meditation and biofeedback. These can help you learn to control the stress that triggers sweating.	
Hyperparathyroidism|Fragile bones that easily fracture (osteoporosis)	Kidney stones	Excessive urination	Abdominal pain	Tiring easily or weakness	Depression or forgetfulness	Bone and joint pain	Frequent complaints of illness with no apparent cause	Nausea, vomiting or loss of appetite	| Monitor how much calcium and vitamin D you get in your diet. The Institute of Medicine recommends 1,000 milligrams (mg) of calcium a day for adults ages 19 to 50 and men ages 51 to 70. That calcium recommendation increases to 1,200 mg a day for women age 51 and older and men age 71 and older. The Institute of Medicine also recommends 600 international units (IUs) of vitamin D a day for adults ages 1 to 70 and 800 IUs a day for adults age 71 and older. Talk to your doctor about dietary guidelines that are appropriate for you. 	Drink plenty of fluids. Drink enough fluids, mostly water, to produce nearly clear urine to lessen the risk of kidney stones.	Exercise regularly. Regular exercise, including strength training, helps maintain strong bones. Talk to your doctor about what type of exercise program is best for you.	Don't smoke. Smoking may increase bone loss as well as increase your risk of a number of serious health problems. Talk to your doctor about the best ways to quit.	Avoid calcium-raising drugs. Certain medications, including some diuretics and lithium, can raise calcium levels. If you take such drugs, ask your doctor whether another medication may be appropriate for you.	
Hyperthyroidism|Sudden weight loss, even when your appetite and the amount and type of food you eat remain the same or even increase	Rapid heartbeat (tachycardia) — commonly more than 100 beats a minute — irregular heartbeat (arrhythmia) or pounding of your heart (palpitations)	Increased appetite	Nervousness, anxiety and irritability	Tremor — usually a fine trembling in your hands and fingers	Sweating	Changes in menstrual patterns	Increased sensitivity to heat	Changes in bowel patterns, especially more frequent bowel movements	An enlarged thyroid gland (goiter), which may appear as a swelling at the base of your neck	Fatigue, muscle weakness	Difficulty sleeping	Skin thinning	Fine, brittle hair	| Ask your doctor about supplementing your diet. If you've lost a great deal of weight or experienced muscle wasting, you may benefit from adding extra calories and protein to your diet. Your doctor or a dietitian can help you with meal planning. In most cases, you won't need to continue supplementing your diet once your hyperthyroidism is under control. Treatment for hyperthyroidism can also eventually contribute to excessive weight gain. It is important to learn how to get as much nutrition as possible from your food without eating a lot of extra calories. In addition, eating the correct amount of sodium and calcium are important dietary considerations for people with hyperthyroidism. 	Get enough calcium and vitamin D. Because hyperthyroidism may contribute to thinning bones, it's important to get enough calcium every day to help prevent osteoporosis. The Institute of Medicine recommends 1,000 milligrams (mg) of calcium a day for adults ages 19 to 50 and men ages 51 to 70. That calcium recommendation increases to 1,200 mg a day if you're a woman age 51 or older or a man age 71 or older. The Institute of Medicine also recommends 600 international units (IUs) of vitamin D a day for adults ages 19 to 70 and 800 IUs a day for adults age 71 and older. Talk to your doctor about appropriate dietary guidelines for you.	
Hypoglycemia|Heart palpitations	Fatigue	Pale skin	Shakiness	Anxiety	Sweating	Hunger	Irritability	Tingling sensation around the mouth	Crying out during sleep	|
Hyponatremia|Nausea and vomiting 	Headache	Confusion 	Loss of energy and fatigue 	Restlessness and irritability 	Muscle weakness, spasms or cramps 	Seizures 	Coma 	|
Hypoparathyroidism|Tingling or burning (paresthesias) in your fingertips, toes and lips	Muscle aches or cramps affecting your legs, feet, abdomen or face	Twitching or spasms of your muscles, particularly around your mouth, but also in your hands, arms and throat	Fatigue or weakness	Painful menstruation	Patchy hair loss, such as thinning of your eyebrows	Dry, coarse skin	Brittle nails	Headaches	Depression, mood swings	Memory problems	|
Hypopituitarism|Fatigue 	Weight loss 	Decreased sex drive 	Sensitivity to cold or difficulty staying warm 	Decreased appetite 	Facial puffiness 	Anemia 	Infertility 	Hot flashes, irregular or no periods, loss of pubic hair, and inability to produce milk for breast-feeding in women 	Decreased facial or body hair in men 	Short stature in children 	|
Hypospadias|Opening of the urethra at a location other than the tip of the penis	Downward curve of the penis (chordee) 	Hooded appearance of the penis because only the top half of the penis is covered by foreskin	Abnormal spraying during urination	|
Hypothermia|Shivering	Dizziness	Hunger	Nausea	Faster breathing	Trouble speaking	Slight confusion	Lack of coordination	Fatigue	Increased heart rate	|
Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD)|Diarrhea. Diarrhea is a common problem for people with IBD.	Fever and fatigue. Many people with IBD experience a low-grade fever. You may also feel tired or have low energy.	Abdominal pain and cramping. Inflammation and ulceration can affect the normal movement of contents through your digestive tract and may lead to pain and cramping. You may also experience nausea and vomiting.	Blood in your stool. You might notice bright red blood in the toilet bowl or darker blood mixed with your stool. You can also have bleeding you don't see (occult blood).	Reduced appetite. Abdominal pain and cramping, as well as inflammation, can affect your appetite.	Unintended weight loss. You may lose weight and even become malnourished because you cannot properly digest and absorb food.	|Limit dairy products. Many people with inflammatory bowel disease find that problems such as diarrhea, abdominal pain and gas improve when they limit or cut out dairy products. You may be lactose intolerant — that is, your body can't digest the milk sugar (lactose) in dairy foods. Using an enzyme product such as Lactaid may help as well. 	Try low-fat foods. If you have Crohn's disease of the small intestine, you may not be able to digest or absorb fat normally. Instead, fat passes through your intestine, making your diarrhea worse. Try avoiding butter, margarine, cream sauces and fried foods. 	 Take care with fiber. If you have inflammatory bowel disease, high-fiber foods, such as fresh fruits and vegetables and whole grains, may make your symptoms worse, especially if you have narrowing in the bowel. If raw fruits and vegetables bother you, try steaming, baking or stewing them. In general, you may have more problems with foods in the cabbage family, such as broccoli and cauliflower, nuts, seeds, corn, and popcorn. You may be told to limit fiber or go on a low-residue diet if you have a narrowing of your bowel (stricture). 	Avoid other problem foods. Spicy foods, alcohol and caffeine may make your signs and symptoms worse. 	
Irritable bowel syndrome|Abdominal pain or cramping	A bloated feeling	Gas 	Diarrhea or constipation — sometimes alternating bouts of constipation and diarrhea	Mucus in the stool	| Experiment with fiber. When you have irritable bowel syndrome, fiber can be a mixed blessing. Although it helps reduce constipation, it can also make gas and cramping worse. The best approach is to slowly increase the amount of fiber in your diet over a period of weeks. Examples of foods that contain fiber are whole grains, fruits, vegetables and beans. If your signs and symptoms remain the same or worse, tell your doctor. You may also want to talk to a dietitian. Some people do better limiting dietary fiber and instead take a fiber supplement that causes less gas and bloating. If you take a fiber supplement, such as Metamucil or Citrucel, be sure to introduce it slowly and drink plenty of water every day to reduce gas, bloating and constipation. If you find that taking fiber helps your IBS, use it on a regular basis for best results. 	 Avoid problem foods. If certain foods make your signs and symptoms worse, don't eat them. These may include alcohol, chocolate, caffeinated beverages such as coffee and sodas, medications that contain caffeine, dairy products, and sugar-free sweeteners such as sorbitol or mannitol. If gas is a problem for you, foods that might make symptoms worse include beans, cabbage, cauliflower and broccoli. Fatty foods also may be a problem for some people. Chewing gum or drinking through a straw can lead to swallowing air, causing more gas. 	 Eat at regular times. Don't skip meals, and try to eat about the same time each day to help regulate bowel function. If you have diarrhea, you may find that eating small, frequent meals makes you feel better. But if you're constipated, eating larger amounts of high-fiber foods may help move food through your intestines. 	 Take care with dairy products. If you're lactose intolerant, try substituting yogurt for milk. Or use an enzyme product to help break down lactose. Consuming small amounts of milk products or combining them with other foods also may help. In some cases, though, you may need to stop eating dairy foods completely. If so, be sure to get enough protein, calcium and B vitamins from other sources. 	 Drink plenty of liquids. Try to drink plenty of fluids every day. Water is best. Alcohol and beverages that contain caffeine stimulate your intestines and can make diarrhea worse, and carbonated drinks can produce gas. 	 Exercise regularly. Exercise helps relieve depression and stress, stimulates normal contractions of your intestines, and can help you feel better about yourself. If you've been inactive, start slowly and gradually increase the amount of time you exercise. If you have other medical problems, check with your doctor before starting an exercise program. 	 Use anti-diarrheal medications and laxatives with caution. If you try over-the-counter anti-diarrheal medications, such as Imodium or Kaopectate, use the lowest dose that helps. Imodium may be helpful if taken 20 to 30 minutes before eating, especially if you know that the food planned for your meal is likely to cause diarrhea. In the long run, these medications can cause problems if you don't use them correctly. The same is true of laxatives. If you have any questions about them, check with your doctor or pharmacist. 	
Ice cream headaches|Sharp, stabbing pain in the forehead	Pain that peaks about 20 to 60 seconds after it begins and goes away in about the same time	Pain that rarely lasts longer than five minutes	|
Ichthyosis vulgaris|Dry, scaly skin	Tile-like, small scales	Scales colored white, dirty gray or brown — with darker-colored scales typically on darker skin	Flaky scalp	Deep, painful cracks in your skin	|Take long soaking baths to soften the skin. Use mild soap. Rub dampened skin lightly with a rough-textured sponge (loofa) or a pumice stone to help remove the scales.	After showering or bathing, gently pat or blot the skin dry with a towel so that some moisture remains on the skin.	Apply moisturizer or lubricating cream while the skin is still moist from bathing. Choose a moisturizer with urea or propylene glycol — chemicals that help keep skin moist. Petroleum jelly is another good choice.	Apply an over-the-counter product that contains urea, lactic acid or a low concentration of salicylic acid twice daily. Mild acidic compounds help skin shed its dead skin cells. Urea helps bind moisture to skin.	Use a portable home humidifier or one attached to your furnace to add moisture to the air inside your home.	
Infant jaundice|Your baby's skin becomes more yellow	Your baby's skin looks yellow on the abdomen, arms or legs	The whites of your baby's eyes look yellow	Your baby seems listless or sick or is difficult to awaken	Your baby isn't gaining weight or is feeding poorly	Your baby makes high-pitched cries	Your baby develops any other signs or symptoms that concern you	Jaundice lasts more than three weeks 	|More-frequent feedings. Feeding more frequently will provide your baby with more milk and cause more bowel movements, increasing the amount of bilirubin eliminated in your baby's stool. Breast-fed infants should have eight to 12 feedings a day for the first several days of life. Formula-fed infants usually should have 1 to 2 ounces (about 30 to 60 milliliters) of formula every two to three hours for the first week.	Supplemental feedings. If your baby is having trouble breast-feeding, is losing weight or is dehydrated, your doctor may suggest giving your baby formula or expressed milk to supplement breast-feeding. In some cases, your doctor may recommend using formula alone for a couple of days and then resuming breast-feeding. Ask your doctor what feeding options are right for your baby.	
Idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP)|Easy or excessive bruising (purpura) — your skin naturally bruises and bleeds more easily as you age, but this shouldn't be confused with ITP 	Superficial bleeding into your skin that appears as a rash of pinpoint-sized reddish-purple spots (petechiae), usually on your lower legs 	Prolonged bleeding from cuts 	Spontaneous bleeding from nose 	Bleeding gums, especially after dental work 	Blood in urine or stools 	Unusually heavy menstrual flow 	Fatigue 	|Avoid platelet-impairing medications. Over-the-counter drugs, such as aspirin and ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin IB, others), can impair platelet function. 	Choose low-impact physical activities. Your doctor may recommend avoiding competitive sports or other activities that might increase the risk of injury and bleeding. 	Watch for signs of infection. If you've had your spleen removed, be alert for any signs of infection, including fever, and seek prompt treatment. Infection in someone who's had a splenectomy may be more severe, last longer and have more serious implications than in someone who still has an intact spleen. 	
IgA nephropathy (Berger's disease)|Cola- or tea-colored urine (caused by red blood cells in the urine) 	Repeated episodes of cola- or tea-colored urine, sometimes even visible blood in your urine, usually during or after an upper respiratory or other type of infection 	Pain in the side(s) of your back below your ribs (flank) 	Foam in the toilet water from protein in your urine 	Swelling (edema) in your hands and feet 	High blood pressure 	|Take steps to reduce your blood pressure. Keeping your blood pressure levels near normal may help slow kidney damage from IgA nephropathy. Your doctor may recommend healthy changes in your diet — including limiting your salt intake — losing excess weight, being physically active, using alcohol in moderation and remembering to take your blood pressure medications as ways to keep your blood pressure under control. 	Monitor your blood pressure levels at home. Note each reading and bring this record with you to your doctor's appointments. 	Eat less protein. Reducing the amount of protein you eat and taking steps to decrease your cholesterol levels may help slow the progression of IgA nephropathy and protect your kidneys. 	
Illness anxiety disorder|Being preoccupied with having or getting a serious disease or health condition	Worrying that minor symptoms or body sensations mean you have a serious illness	Being easily alarmed about your health status	Finding little or no reassurance from negative test results or a doctor's reassurance that you're healthy	Worrying excessively about a specific medical condition or your risk of developing a medical condition because it runs in your family	Having so much distress about possible illnesses that it's hard for you to function	Repeatedly checking your body for signs of illness	Frequently making medical appointments for reassurance — or, avoiding medical care for fear of being diagnosed with a serious illness	Avoiding people, places or activities for fear of health risks	Constantly talking about your health and possible illnesses	Frequently searching the Internet for causes of symptoms or possible illnesses	|Work with your provider. Work with your doctor or mental health provider to determine a regular schedule for visits to discuss your concerns and build a trusting relationship. Discuss setting reasonable limits on tests, evaluations and specialist referrals. Avoid seeking advice from multiple doctors or emergency room visits that can make your care harder to coordinate and may subject you to duplicate testing. With your provider's help, find different ways to manage your worries other than excessive medical testing or avoidance of medical care.	Practice stress management and relaxation techniques. Learning stress management and relaxation methods, such as progressive muscle relaxation, may help reduce anxiety.	Get physically active. A graduated activity program may have a calming effect on your mood, reduce your anxiety and help improve your physical functioning.	Participate in activities. Stay involved in work, social and family activities.	Avoid alcohol and recreational drugs. Substance use can make your care more difficult. Talk to your health care provider if you need help quitting.	Avoid searching the Internet for possible diseases. The vast amount of health information that may or may not be related to your situation can cause confusion and anxiety. If you have symptoms that concern you, talk to your doctor at your next scheduled appointment.	
Impacted wisdom teeth|Red or swollen gums	Tender or bleeding gums	Jaw pain	Swelling around the jaw	Bad breath	An unpleasant taste in your mouth	Difficulty opening your mouth	|
Impetigo||Treatments and drugs	Prevention	
Incompetent cervix|A sensation of pelvic pressure	A backache	Mild abdominal cramps	A change in vaginal discharge	Light vaginal bleeding	|Treatments and drugs	Coping and support	
Indigestion|Early fullness during a meal. You haven't eaten much of your meal, but you already feel full and may not be able to finish eating. 	Uncomfortable fullness after a meal. Fullness lasts longer than it should. 	Discomfort in the upper abdomen. You feel a mild to severe pain in the area between the bottom of your breastbone (sternum) and your navel. 	Burning in the upper abdomen. You feel an uncomfortable heat or burning sensation between the bottom of the breastbone and navel. 	Bloating in the upper abdomen. You feel an uncomfortable sensation of tightness. 	Nausea. 	|Eating smaller, more frequent meals. Chew your food slowly and thoroughly. 	Avoiding triggers. Fatty and spicy foods, processed foods, carbonated beverages, caffeine, alcohol and smoking can trigger indigestion. 	Maintaining a healthy weight. Excess pounds put pressure on your abdomen, pushing up your stomach and causing acid to back up into your esophagus. 	Exercising regularly. Exercise helps you keep off extra weight and promotes better digestion. 	Managing stress. Create a calm environment at mealtime. Practice relaxation techniques, such as deep breathing, meditation or yoga. Spend time doing things you enjoy. Get plenty of sleep. 	Changing your medications. With your doctor's approval, stop or cut back on pain relievers or other medications that may irritate your stomach lining. If that's not an option, be sure to take these medications with food. 	
Infertility|You're age 35 to 40 and have been trying to conceive for six months or longer	You're over age 40	You menstruate irregularly or not at all	You have known fertility problems	You've been diagnosed with endometriosis or pelvic inflammatory disease	You've had more than one miscarriage	You've had prior cancer treatment	|
Inflammatory breast cancer|Rapid change in the appearance of one breast, over the course of several weeks	Thickness, heaviness or visible enlargement of one breast	Discoloration, giving the breast a red, purple, pink or bruised appearance	Unusual warmth of the affected breast	Dimpling or ridges on the skin of the affected breast, similar to an orange peel	Tenderness, pain or aching	Enlarged lymph nodes under the arm, above the collarbone or below the collarbone	Flattening or turning inward of the nipple	|
Influenza (flu)|Fever over 100 F (38 C)	Aching muscles, especially in your back, arms and legs	Chills and sweats	Headache	Dry, persistent cough	Fatigue and weakness	Nasal congestion 	Sore throat	|Drink plenty of liquids. Choose water, juice and warm soups to prevent dehydration.	Rest. Get more sleep to help your immune system fight infection.	Consider pain relievers. Use an over-the-counter pain reliever, such as acetaminophen (Tylenol, others) or ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin IB, others), to combat the achiness associated with influenza. Don't give aspirin to children or teens because of the risk of Reye's syndrome, a rare, but potentially fatal disease.	
Ingrown hair|Small, solid, rounded bumps (papules)	Small, pus-filled, blister-like lesions (pustules)	Skin darkening (hyperpigmentation)	Pain	Itching	Embedded hairs	|Wash the affected area using a washcloth or soft-bristled toothbrush. Use a circular motion for several minutes. Do this before shaving and at bedtime.	Use a sterile needle, inserting it under hair loops, to gently lift embedded hair tips.	
Ingrown toenails|Pain and tenderness in your toe along one or both sides of the nail	Redness around your toenail	Swelling of your toe around the nail	Infection of the tissue around your toenail	|Soak your feet in warm water. Do this for 15 to 20 minutes three to four times a day. Soaking reduces swelling and relieves tenderness.	Place cotton or dental floss under your toenail. After each soaking, put fresh bits of cotton or waxed dental floss under the ingrown edge. This will help the nail grow above the skin edge.	Apply antibiotic cream. Put antibiotic ointment on the tender area and bandage the toe.	Choose sensible footwear. Consider wearing open-toed shoes or sandals until your toe feels better.	Take pain relievers. Over-the-counter pain relievers such as acetaminophen (Tylenol, others), ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin IB, others) and naproxen sodium (Aleve) may help ease the toe pain.	
Inguinal hernia|A bulge in the area on either side of your pubic bone 	A burning, gurgling or aching sensation at the bulge 	Pain or discomfort in your groin, especially when bending over, coughing or lifting 	A heavy or dragging sensation in your groin 	Weakness or pressure in your groin 	Occasionally, pain and swelling around the testicles when the protruding intestine descends into the scrotum 	|
Insomnia|Difficulty falling asleep at night	Awakening during the night	Awakening too early	Not feeling well rested after a night's sleep	Daytime tiredness or sleepiness	Irritability, depression or anxiety	Difficulty paying attention, focusing on tasks or remembering	Increased errors or accidents	Tension headaches	Distress in the stomach and intestines (gastrointestinal tract)	Ongoing worries about sleep	|Exercise and stay active. Activity helps promote a good night's sleep. Get at least 20 to 30 minutes of vigorous exercise daily at least five to six hours before bedtime.	Check your medications. If you take medications regularly, check with your doctor to see if they may be contributing to your insomnia. Also check the labels of OTC products to see if they contain caffeine or other stimulants, such as pseudoephedrine.	Avoid or limit naps. Naps can make it harder to fall asleep at night. If you can't get by without one, try to limit a nap to no more than 30 minutes and don't nap after 3 p.m. 	Avoid or limit caffeine and alcohol and don't use nicotine. All of these can make it harder to sleep. Avoid caffeine after lunchtime. Avoiding alcohol can help prevent restless sleep and frequent awakenings.	Don't put up with pain. If a painful condition bothers you, make sure the pain reliever you take is effective enough to control pain while you're sleeping.	Stick to a sleep schedule. Keep your bedtime and wake time consistent from day to day, including on weekends.	
Intermittent explosive disorder|Rage	Irritability	Increased energy	Racing thoughts	Tingling	Tremors	Palpitations	Chest tightness	|
Interstitial cystitis|Pain in your pelvis or between the vagina and anus in women or between the scrotum and anus in men (perineum).	Chronic pelvic pain.	A persistent, urgent need to urinate.	Frequent urination, often of small amounts, throughout the day and night. People with severe interstitial cystitis may urinate as often as 60 times a day.	Pain or discomfort while the bladder fills and relief after urinating.	Pain during sexual intercourse.	| Dietary changes. Eliminating or reducing foods in your diet that are potential bladder irritants may help to relieve the discomfort of interstitial cystitis. Common bladder irritants — known as the "four Cs" — include: carbonated beverages, caffeine in all forms (including chocolate), citrus products and food containing high concentrations of vitamin C. Also consider avoiding similar foods, such as tomatoes, pickled foods, alcohol and spices. Artificial sweeteners may aggravate symptoms in some people. If you think certain foods may irritate your bladder, try eliminating them from your diet. Reintroduce them one at a time and pay attention to which, if any, affect your signs and symptoms. 	Bladder training. Bladder training involves timed urination — going to the toilet according to the clock rather than waiting for the need to go. You start by urinating at set intervals, such as every half-hour — whether you have to go or not. Then you gradually wait longer between bathroom visits. During bladder training, you may learn to control urinary urges by using relaxation techniques, such as breathing slowly and deeply or distracting yourself with another activity. 	
Interstitial lung disease|Dry cough	Shortness of breath at rest or with exertion	|Stop smoking. If you have lung disease, the best thing you can do for yourself is to stop smoking. Talk to your doctor about options for quitting, including smoking cessation programs, which use a variety of proven techniques to help people quit. And because secondhand smoke can also be harmful to your lungs, don't allow other people to smoke around you.	Eat well. People with lung disease may lose weight both because it's uncomfortable to eat and because of the extra energy it takes to breathe. These people need a nutritionally rich diet that contains adequate calories. A dietitian can give you further guidelines for healthy eating.	Remain active. As much as you can tolerate, continue to exercise and remain active to avoid deconditioning.	Get vaccinated. Respiratory infections can worsen symptoms of intersitial lung disease. Make sure you receive the pneumonia vaccine and an annual flu shot.	
Intestinal ischemia|Sudden abdominal pain that may range from mild to severe	An urgent need to have a bowel movement	Frequent, forceful bowel movements	Abdominal tenderness or distention	Blood in your stool	Nausea, vomiting	Fever	Mental confusion in older adults	|
Intracranial hematoma|Increasing headache	Vomiting	Drowsiness and progressive loss of consciousness	Dizziness	Confusion	Unequal pupil size	Slurred speech	Increased blood pressure	|
Invasive lobular carcinoma|An area of thickening in part of the breast	A new area of fullness or swelling in the breast	A change in the texture or appearance of the skin over the breast, such as dimpling or thickening	A newly inverted nipple	|
Iritis|Eye redness	Discomfort or achiness in the affected eye	Sensitivity to light (photophobia)	Blurred vision	Floating specks or spots in your vision	|
Iron deficiency anemia|Extreme fatigue	Pale skin	Weakness	Shortness of breath	Chest pain	Frequent infections	Headache	Dizziness or lightheadedness	Cold hands and feet	Inflammation or soreness of your tongue	Brittle nails	Fast heartbeat	Unusual cravings for non-nutritive substances, such as ice, dirt or starch	Poor appetite, especially in infants and children with iron deficiency anemia	An uncomfortable tingling or crawling feeling in your legs (restless legs syndrome)	|
Ischemic colitis|Pain, tenderness or cramping in your belly, which can occur suddenly or gradually	Bright red or maroon-colored blood in your stool or, at times, passage of blood alone without stool	A feeling of urgency to move your bowels	Diarrhea	Nausea	|
Itchy skin (pruritus)|Redness	Bumps, spots or blisters	Dry, cracked skin	Leathery or scaly texture to the skin	|Use a high-quality moisturizing cream on your skin. Apply this cream at least once or twice daily, concentrating on the areas where itching is most severe. Examples include Cetaphil, Eucerin, CeraVe and others.	 Apply an anti-itch cream or lotion to the affected area. Short-term use of nonprescription hydrocortisone cream containing at least 1 percent hydrocortisone can temporarily relieve the itch. So can menthol, camphor or calamine. Topical anesthetics, such as lidocaine or benzocaine, may be helpful. However, benzocaine has been linked to a rare but serious, sometimes deadly condition known as methemoglobinemia, which decreases the amount of oxygen that the blood can carry. Don't use benzocaine in children younger than age 2 without supervision from a health care professional. If you're an adult, never use more than the recommended dose of benzocaine, and consider talking with your doctor. 	Avoid scratching whenever possible. Cover the itchy area if you can't keep from scratching it. Trim nails and wear gloves at night.	Apply cool, wet compresses. Covering the affected area with bandages and dressings can help protect the skin and prevent scratching.	Take a lukewarm bath. Sprinkle the bath water with baking soda, uncooked oatmeal or colloidal oatmeal — a finely ground oatmeal that is made for the bathtub (Aveeno, others).	Wear smooth-textured, loose cotton clothing. This will help you avoid irritation.	Choose mild soaps without dyes or perfumes. Be sure to rinse the soap completely off your body. And after washing, apply a moisturizer to protect your skin.	Use a mild, unscented laundry detergent when washing clothes, towels and bedding. Try using the extra-rinse cycle on your washing machine.	Avoid substances that irritate your skin or that cause an allergic reaction. These can include nickel, jewelry, perfume or skin 9999products with fragrance, cleaning products, and cosmetics.	Reduce stress. Stress can worsen itching. Counseling, behavior modification therapy, meditation and yoga are some ways of relieving stress.	
Jellyfish stings|Burning, prickling, stinging pain	Red, brown or purplish tracks on the skin — a "print" of the tentacles' contact with your skin	Itching	Swelling	Tingling and numbness	Throbbing pain that radiates up a leg or an arm	|Remove stingers. Remove any pieces of jellyfish tentacle in your skin by rinsing the wound with seawater. You can also try gently scraping off the stingers with the edge of an ID card or a credit card. Avoid getting sand on the wound. And don't rinse with fresh water or rub the area with a towel, as these actions may activate more stingers.	Rinse with vinegar or apply a baking soda paste. Rinse the affected area with vinegar for about 30 seconds. Or apply a paste of baking soda and seawater. Each method may deactivate the stingers of some types of jellyfish.	Take a hot shower or apply ice packs. Hot water — as hot as you can tolerate but not above 113 F (45 C) — and ice packs may help ease pain.	Take a pain reliever and apply lotions. Apply calamine lotion or lidocaine to help relieve itching and discomfort.	
Jet lag disorder|Disturbed sleep — such as insomnia, early waking or excessive sleepiness	Daytime fatigue	Difficulty concentrating or functioning at your usual level	Stomach problems, constipation or diarrhea	A general feeling of not being well	Mood changes	|Treatments and drugs	Alternative medicine	
Juvenile fibromyalgia|Widespread diffuse pain. The pain associated with fibromyalgia often is described as a constant dull ache that has lasted for at least three months. To be considered widespread, the pain must occur on both sides of your body and above and below your waist.	Headache. Frequent headaches occur in a majority of patients with fibromyalgia.	Sleep disturbances. Despite complaints of severe fatigue, these children often take an hour or more to fall asleep. Even when they do fall asleep, many have difficulty maintaining sleep and wake up during the night.	Fatigue. People with fibromyalgia often awaken tired, even though they report sleeping for long periods of time. Sleep is often disrupted by pain, and many patients with fibromyalgia have other sleep disorders, such as restless legs syndrome and sleep apnea.	Other problems. Many people who have fibromyalgia also may have pain or cramping in the lower abdomen, report cognitive impairment (described as feeling in a "fog"), and experience depression and anxiety.	|Reduce stress. Develop a plan to avoid or limit overexertion and emotional stress. Allow yourself time each day to relax. That may mean learning how to say no without guilt. But try not to change your routine completely. People who quit work or drop all activity tend to do worse than do those who remain active. Try stress management techniques, such as deep-breathing exercises or meditation.	Get enough sleep. Because fatigue is one of the main characteristics of fibromyalgia, getting sufficient sleep is essential. In addition to allotting enough time for sleep, practice good sleep habits, such as going to bed and getting up at the same time each day and limiting daytime napping.	Exercise regularly. At first, exercise may increase your pain. But doing it gradually and regularly often decreases symptoms. Appropriate exercises may include walking, swimming, biking and water aerobics. A physical therapist can help you develop a home exercise program. Stretching, good posture and relaxation exercises also are helpful.	Pace yourself. Keep your activity on an even level. If you do too much on your good days, you may have more bad days. Moderation means not overdoing it on your good days, but likewise it means not self-limiting or doing too little on the days when symptoms flare.	Maintain a healthy lifestyle. Eat healthy foods. Limit your caffeine intake. Do something that you find enjoyable and fulfilling every day.	
Juvenile rheumatoid arthritis|Pain. While your child might not complain of joint pain, you may notice that he or she limps — especially first thing in the morning or after a nap.	Swelling. Joint swelling is common but is often first noticed in larger joints like the knee.	Stiffness. You might notice that your child appears clumsier than usual, particularly in the morning or after naps.	|Getting regular exercise. Exercise is important because it promotes both muscle strength and joint flexibility. Swimming is an excellent choice because it places minimal stress on joints.	Applying cold or heat. Stiffness affects many children with juvenile rheumatoid arthritis, particularly in the morning. Although some children respond well to cold packs, most children prefer a hot pack or a hot bath or shower.	 Eating well. Some children with arthritis have poor appetites. Others may gain excess weight due to medications or physical inactivity. A healthy diet can help maintain an appropriate body weight. Adequate calcium in the diet is important because children with juvenile rheumatoid arthritis are at risk of developing weak bones (osteoporosis) due to the disease, the use of corticosteroids, and decreased physical activity and weight bearing. 	
Kawasaki disease|Fever which often is higher than 102.2 F (39 C) and lasts more than five days	Extremely red eyes (conjunctivitis) without a thick discharge	A rash on the main part of the body (trunk) and in the genital area	Red, dry, cracked lips and an extremely red, swollen tongue (strawberry tongue)	Swollen, red skin on the palms of the hands and the soles of the feet	Swollen lymph nodes in the neck and perhaps elsewhere	Irritability	|
Keratitis|Eye redness	Eye pain	Excess tears or other discharge from your eye	Difficulty opening your eyelid because of pain or irritation	Blurred vision	Decreased vision	Sensitivity to light (photophobia)	A feeling that something is in your eye	|
Kidney cancer|Blood in your urine, which may appear pink, red or cola colored	Back pain just below the ribs that doesn't go away	Weight loss	Fatigue	Intermittent fever	|
Kidney cysts|Dull pain in your back or side	Fever	Upper abdominal pain	|
Kidney infection|Fever	Back, side (flank) or groin pain	Abdominal pain	Frequent urination	Strong, persistent urge to urinate	Burning sensation or pain when urinating	Pus or blood in your urine (hematuria)	Urine that smells bad or is cloudy	|Apply heat. Place a heating pad on your abdomen, back or side to reduce feelings of pressure or pain.	Use pain medicine. For fever or discomfort, take a nonaspirin pain reliever that contains acetaminophen (Tylenol, others) as directed by your doctor, or take a prescription medication that he or she provides.	Stay hydrated. Drinking plenty of fluids will help flush bacteria from your urinary tract. Avoid coffee and alcohol until your infection has cleared. These products can aggravate a frequent or urgent need to urinate.	
Kidney stones|Severe pain in the side and back, below the ribs	Pain that spreads to the lower abdomen and groin	Pain that comes in waves and fluctuates in intensity	Pain on urination	Pink, red or brown urine	Cloudy or foul-smelling urine	Nausea and vomiting	Persistent need to urinate	Urinating more often than usual	Fever and chills if an infection is present	Urinating small amounts of urine	|
Kleptomania|Inability to resist powerful urges to steal items that you don't need	Feeling increased tension, anxiety or arousal leading up to the theft	Feeling pleasure, relief or gratification while stealing	Feeling terrible guilt, remorse, self-loathing, shame or fear of arrest after the theft	Return of the urges and a repetition of the kleptomania cycle	|
Klinefelter syndrome|Weak muscles 	Slow motor development — taking longer than average to sit up, crawl and walk 	Delay in speaking 	Quiet, docile personality 	Problems at birth, such as testicles that haven't descended into the scrotum 	|
Klippel-Trenaunay syndrome|Port-wine stain. This pink to reddish-purple birthmark is caused by swelling of tiny blood vessels (capillaries) under the skin. The birthmark usually covers part of one leg, and sometimes one arm, and may get darker or lighter with age. Some areas may be prone to bleeding and infections.	Vein malformations. These include swollen, twisted veins (varicose veins) usually on the surface of the legs, which can cause major pain and skin ulcers due to poor circulation. Deeper abnormal veins in the arms, legs, abdomen and pelvis can increase the risk of blood clots (deep vein thrombosis) and cause a life-threatening condition called pulmonary embolism if they dislodge and travel to the lungs. Spongy tissue filled with small veins in or under the skin can cause bleeding, infection or inflammation.	Overgrowth of bones and soft tissue. This begins in infancy and is usually limited to one leg, but it can occur in an arm or, rarely, in the trunk. This overgrowth of bone and tissue creates a larger and longer extremity. The overgrowth can cause pain, a feeling of heaviness and problems with movement.	Lymphatic system abnormalities. The lymphatic system is part of your immune system, which protects you against infection and disease. An abnormality can cause fluid buildup and swelling in the tissues of your arms or legs (lymphedema), the development of small masses (lymphatic cysts) in the spleen, or infection of the layer under the skin (cellulitis).	|Port-wine stain. This pink to reddish-purple birthmark is caused by swelling of tiny blood vessels (capillaries) under the skin. The birthmark usually covers part of one leg, and sometimes one arm, and may get darker or lighter with age. Some areas may be prone to bleeding and infections.	Vein malformations. These include swollen, twisted veins (varicose veins) usually on the surface of the legs, which can cause major pain and skin ulcers due to poor circulation. Deeper abnormal veins in the arms, legs, abdomen and pelvis can increase the risk of blood clots (deep vein thrombosis) and cause a life-threatening condition called pulmonary embolism if they dislodge and travel to the lungs. Spongy tissue filled with small veins in or under the skin can cause bleeding, infection or inflammation.	Overgrowth of bones and soft tissue. This begins in infancy and is usually limited to one leg, but it can occur in an arm or, rarely, in the trunk. This overgrowth of bone and tissue creates a larger and longer extremity. The overgrowth can cause pain, a feeling of heaviness and problems with movement.	Lymphatic system abnormalities. The lymphatic system is part of your immune system, which protects you against infection and disease. An abnormality can cause fluid buildup and swelling in the tissues of your arms or legs (lymphedema), the development of small masses (lymphatic cysts) in the spleen, or infection of the layer under the skin (cellulitis).	
Knee bursitis||Rest your knee. Discontinue the activity that causes knee bursitis and avoid movements that worsen your pain. 	Apply ice. Apply an ice pack to your knee for 20 minutes at a time several times a day until the pain goes away and your knee no longer feels warm to the touch. 	Apply compression. Use of a compressive wrap or knee sleeve can help to reduce swelling.	Elevate your knee. Elevate your knee by propping up your legs on pillows. This can help reduce swelling in your knee. 	
Knee pain|Swelling and stiffness 	Redness and warmth to the touch 	Weakness or instability 	Popping or crunching noises 	Inability to fully straighten the knee 	|Rest. Take a break from your normal activities to reduce repetitive strain on your knee, give the injury time to heal and help prevent further damage. A day or two of rest may be all you need for a minor injury. More severe damage is likely to need a longer recovery time. 	Ice. Ice reduces both pain and inflammation. A bag of frozen peas works well because it covers your whole knee. You can also use an ice pack wrapped in a thin towel to protect your skin. Although ice therapy is generally safe and effective, don't use ice for longer than 20 minutes at a time because of the risk of damage to your nerves and skin. 	Compression. This helps prevent fluid buildup in damaged tissues and maintains knee alignment and stability. Look for a compression bandage that's lightweight, breathable and self-adhesive. It should be tight enough to support your knee without interfering with circulation. 	Elevation. To help reduce swelling, try propping your injured leg on pillows or sitting in a recliner. 	
Krabbe disease|Feeding difficulties	Unexplained crying	Extreme irritability	Fever with no sign of infection	Declines in alertness	Delays in typical developmental milestones	Muscle spasms	Loss of head control	Frequent vomiting	|
Lactose intolerance|Diarrhea	Nausea, and sometimes, vomiting	Abdominal cramps	Bloating	Gas	|Broccoli	Calcium-fortified products, such as breads and juices	Canned salmon	Milk substitutes, such as soy milk and rice milk	Oranges	Pinto beans	Rhubarb	Spinach	
Laryngitis|Hoarseness 	Weak voice or voice loss	Tickling sensation and rawness of your throat	Sore throat	Dry throat	Dry cough 	|Breathe moist air. Use a humidifier to keep the air throughout your home or office moist. Inhale steam from a bowl of hot water or a hot shower.	Rest your voice as much as possible. Avoid talking or singing too loudly or for too long. If you need to speak before large groups, try to use a microphone or megaphone. 	Drink plenty of fluids to prevent dehydration (avoid alcohol and caffeine).	Moisten your throat. Try sucking on lozenges, gargling with salt water or chewing a piece of gum.	Avoid decongestants. These medications can dry out your throat.	Avoid whispering. This puts even more strain on your voice than normal speech does.	
Latex allergy|Itching	Skin redness	Hives or rash	|
Lazy eye (amblyopia)|An eye that wanders inward or outward 	Eyes that may not appear to work together 	Poor depth perception 	|
Lobular carcinoma in situ (LCIS)||Drink alcohol in moderation, if at all. Limit your alcohol consumption to one drink a day, if you choose to drink.	Exercise most days of the week. Aim for at least 30 minutes of exercise on most days of the week. If you haven't been active lately, ask your doctor whether it's OK, and start slowly.	 Maintain a healthy weight. If your current weight is healthy, work to maintain that weight. If you need to lose weight, ask your doctor about healthy strategies to accomplish this. Reduce the number of calories you eat each day and slowly increase the amount of exercise. Aim to lose weight slowly — about 1 or 2 pounds (about .5 or 1.0 kilograms) a week. 	
Lead poisoning|Developmental delay	Learning difficulties	Irritability	Loss of appetite	Weight loss	Sluggishness and fatigue	Abdominal pain	Vomiting	Constipation	Hearing loss	|
Left ventricular hypertrophy|Shortness of breath	Fatigue	Chest pain, often after exercising	Sensation of rapid, fluttering or pounding heartbeats (palpitations)	Dizziness or fainting	|Weight loss. Left ventricular hypertrophy is often found in obese people regardless of blood pressure. Losing weight has been shown to reverse left ventricular hypertrophy.	Limiting salt in your diet. Too much salt can increase your blood pressure. Choose low sodium or no-salt-added foods, and don't add salt to your meals.	Drinking alcohol in moderation, if at all. Alcohol can also raise your blood pressure, especially if consumed in large amounts.	Regular exercise. Aim for at least 30 minutes of physical activity, such as walking, most days of the week. Ask your doctor if you need to restrict certain physical activities, such as weightlifting, which may temporarily raise your blood pressure.	
Legg-Calve-Perthes disease|Limping	Pain or stiffness in the hip, groin, thigh or knee	Limited range of motion of the hip joint	|Activity modification. Your child should avoid high-impact activities, such as running or jumping, because they can increase the amount of damage to the weakened bone and worsen symptoms.	Pain medication. Over-the-counter medicines such as acetaminophen (Tylenol, others) can help relieve pain. Don't give your child aspirin as it's been linked to a rare, but serious, condition called Reye's syndrome.	Heat or cold. Hot packs or ice may help relieve hip pain associated with Legg-Calve-Perthes disease. Using heat before stretching exercises can help loosen tight muscles.	
Legionnaires' disease|Headache	Muscle pain	Chills	Fever that may be 104 F (40 C) or higher	|
Leukemia|Fever or chills	Persistent fatigue, weakness	Frequent or severe infections	Losing weight without trying	Swollen lymph nodes, enlarged liver or spleen	Easy bleeding or bruising	Recurrent nosebleeds	Tiny red spots in your skin (petechiae)	Excessive sweating, especially at night	Bone pain or tenderness	|
Leukoplakia|White or grayish in patches that can't be wiped away 	Irregular or flat-textured 	Thickened or hardened in areas 	Along with raised, red lesions (erythroplakia), which are more likely to show precancerous changes 	|
Lewy body dementia|Visual hallucinations. You may see visual hallucinations, such as colors, shapes, animals or people that aren't there. Hallucinations may be one of the first symptoms of Lewy body dementia. Some people also may experience sound (auditory), smell (olfactory) or touch (tactile) hallucinations.	Movement disorders. You may experience symptoms similar to those of Parkinson's disease (parkinsonian symptoms), such as slowed movement, rigid muscles, tremors or a shuffling walk.	Poor regulations of body function. Blood pressure, pulse, sweating and digestive process are regulated by a part of the nervous system that is often affected by Lewy body dementia. This can result in dizziness, falls and bowel issues.	Cognitive problems. You may experience thinking (cognitive) problems similar to problems experienced in Alzheimer's disease, such as confusion, reduced attention span and eventually memory loss.	Sleep difficulties. You may have a sleep disorder called rapid eye movement (REM) sleep behavior disorder that can cause you to physically act out your dreams while you're asleep.	Fluctuating attention. You may have frequent episodes of drowsiness, long periods of staring into space, long naps during the day or disorganized speech.	Depression. You may experience depression sometime during the course of your illness.	|Enhance communication. When talking with the person with Lewy body dementia, maintain eye contact. Speak slowly, in simple sentences, and don't rush the response. Present only one idea or instruction at a time. Use gestures and cues, such as pointing to objects.	Encourage exercise. Exercise benefits everyone, including people with dementia. Benefits of exercise include improved physical function, more controlled behavior and fewer depression symptoms. Some research shows physical activity may slow the progression of impaired thinking (cognitive) function in people with dementia.	Encourage participation in games and thinking activities. Participating in games, crossword puzzles and other activities that involve using thinking skills may help slow mental decline in people with dementia.	Establish a nighttime ritual. Behavior issues may be worse at night. Try to establish going-to-bed rituals that are calming and away from the noise of television, meal cleanup and active family members. Leave night lights on to prevent disorientation. Limiting caffeine during the day, discouraging daytime napping and offering opportunities for exercise during the day may help prevent nighttime restlessness.	
Lice|Intense itching.	Tickling feeling from movement of hair.	Lice on your scalp, body, clothing, or pubic or other body hair. Adult lice may be about the size of a sesame seed or slightly larger.	Lice eggs (nits) on hair shafts. Nits resemble tiny pussy willow buds. Nits can be mistaken for dandruff, but unlike dandruff, they can't be easily brushed out of hair.	Small red bumps on the scalp, neck and shoulders.	|Use lotions and shampoos. Choose from among several over-the-counter lotions and shampoos (Nix, Rid, others) designed to kill lice. Apply the product according to package instructions. You may need to repeat treatment with the lotion or shampoo in seven to 10 days. These lotions and shampoos typically aren't recommended for children under age 2.	Comb wet hair. Use a fine-toothed or nit comb to physically remove the lice from wet hair. Repeat every three to four days for at least two weeks. This method may be used in combination with other treatments and is usually recommended as the first line treatment for children under age 2.	After shampoo treatment, rinse your hair with vinegar. Grasp a lock of hair with a cloth saturated with vinegar and strip the lock downward to remove nits. Repeat until you've treated all the hair in this way. Or soak hair with vinegar and leave it on for a few minutes before combing. Then towel-dry the hair. These methods can help remove nits from the hair shaft.	Wash contaminated items. Wash bedding, stuffed animals, clothing and hats with hot, soapy water — at least 130 F (54 C) — and dry them at high heat for at least 20 minutes.	Seal unwashable items. Place them in an airtight bag for two weeks.	Vacuum. Give the floor and furniture a good vacuuming.	Cover furniture. Use a plastic painter's dropcloth to cover furniture for two weeks to prevent acquiring another case of lice. Don't do this if you have a toddler who may become tangled in a plastic sheet and suffocate.	Wash combs and brushes. Use very hot, soapy water — at least 130 F (54 C) — or soak combs and brushes in rubbing alcohol for an hour.	
Lichen nitidus|Size. The bumps range in size from pinpoint to pinhead size.	Shape. They are flat topped and round.	Color. Bumps are usually the same color as your skin. They may be slightly pink on people with lighter skin, or lighter than normal skin color on people with darker skin.	Location. Lichen nitidus bumps commonly occur on the chest, abdomen, arms and genital areas, including the penis. They rarely occur on the palms, soles of the feet or fingernails. Lichen nitidus may clear up at one site on your body but then appear at another.	Itch. In rare cases, the bumps of lichen nitidus may itch, sometimes intensely. They may appear in a line where there's a scratch, crease or constant pressure on the skin, such as a fold of skin on the abdomen or the crease of skin on the inside of the elbow or wrist.	|
Lichen planus|Purplish, flat-topped bumps, most often on the inner forearm, wrist or ankle, but sometimes on the external genitals 	Itching 	Blisters that may break to form scabs or crusts 	White spots or patches in the mouth — inside the cheeks or on the gums, lips or tongue 	Painful oral or vaginal ulcers 	Hair loss and scalp discoloration 	Nail damage or loss 	|Tub soaks with colloidal oatmeal (Aveeno, others) 	Cool compresses 	Aloe vera gel 	Over-the-counter hydrocortisone cream or ointment, containing at least 1 percent hydrocortisone (if you're not using a prescription topical corticosteroid) 	
Lichen sclerosus|Itching (pruritus), which can be severe	Discomfort or pain	Smooth white spots on your skin	Blotchy, wrinkled patches	Easy bruising or tearing	In severe cases, bleeding, blistering or ulcerated lesions	Painful intercourse	|
Limited scleroderma (CREST syndrome)|Tight, hardened skin. In limited scleroderma, skin changes typically affect only the lower arms and legs, including fingers and toes, and sometimes the face and neck. Skin can look shiny from being pulled taut over underlying bone. It may become difficult to bend your fingers or to open your mouth.	Raynaud's phenomenon. This condition occurs when small blood vessels in your fingers and toes go into spasms in response to cold or emotional stress, blocking the flow of blood. In most people, the skin turns white before becoming blue, cold and numb. When circulation improves, the skin usually reddens and may throb or tingle. Raynaud's phenomenon is often one of the earliest signs of limited scleroderma, but many people have only Raynaud's and never develop scleroderma.	Red spots or lines on skin. These small red spots or lines (telangiectasias) are caused by the swelling of tiny blood vessels near the skin's surface. They are not painful and occur primarily on the hands and face.	Bumps under the skin. Limited scleroderma may cause tiny calcium deposits (calcinosis) to develop under your skin, mainly on your elbows, knees and fingers. You can see and feel these deposits, which sometimes may be tender or become infected.	Swallowing difficulties. People with limited scleroderma commonly experience problems with their esophagus — the tube that connects the mouth and stomach. Poor functioning of the muscles in the upper and lower esophagus can make swallowing difficult and allow stomach acids to back up into the esophagus, leading to heartburn, inflammation and scarring of esophageal tissues.	|Eat small, frequent meals	Avoid spicy or fatty foods, chocolate, caffeine, and alcohol	Don't exercise immediately before or after eating	Elevate the head of your bed	Sit upright for two or three hours after a meal	
Lipoma|Situated just under your skin. They commonly occur in the neck, shoulders, back, abdomen, arms and thighs.	Soft and doughy to the touch. They also move easily with slight finger pressure.	Generally small. Lipomas are typically less than 2 inches (5 centimeters) in diameter, but they can grow.	Sometimes painful. Lipomas can be painful if they grow and press on nearby nerves or if they contain many blood vessels.	|
Listeria infection|Fever	Muscle aches	Nausea	Diarrhea	|
Liver cancer|Losing weight without trying	Loss of appetite	Upper abdominal pain	Nausea and vomiting	General weakness and fatigue	Abdominal swelling	Yellow discoloration of your skin and the whites of your eyes (jaundice)	White, chalky stools	|
Liver disease|Skin and eyes that appear yellowish (jaundice)	Abdominal pain and swelling	Swelling in the legs and ankles	Itchy skin	Dark urine color	Pale stool color, or bloody or tar-colored stool	Chronic fatigue	Nausea or vomiting	Loss of appetite	Tendency to bruise easily	|
Liver hemangioma|Pain in the upper right abdomen	Feeling full after eating only a small amount of food	Lack of appetite	Nausea	Vomiting	|
Long QT syndrome| Fainting. This is the most common sign of long QT syndrome. Long QT syndrome-triggered fainting spells (syncope) are caused by the heart temporarily beating in an erratic way. These fainting spells might happen when you're excited, angry, scared or during exercise. Fainting can occur without warning, such as losing consciousness after being startled by a ringing telephone. Unlike normal fainting spells that are preceded by warning signs such as lightheadedness, heart palpitations, irregular heartbeat, weakness and blurred vision, long QT syndrome-triggered fainting spells can occur with little to no warning. 	Seizures. If the heart continues to beat erratically, the brain becomes increasingly deprived of oxygen, which can cause seizures.	Sudden death. Generally, the heart returns to its normal rhythm. If this doesn't happen spontaneously and paramedics don't arrive in time to convert the rhythm back to normal with an external defibrillator, sudden death will occur.	| Don't overexert yourself. You don't necessarily have to give up sports if you have long QT syndrome. Your doctor might permit recreational activities as long as you have a buddy along in case you have a fainting episode. In general, people with long QT syndrome should never swim alone. Strenuous exercise might be dangerous and isn't recommended for some people with long QT syndrome. However, others might have a lower risk of complications and may be able to continue strenuous exercise and even competitive sports. Discuss this issue with your doctor carefully. 	Know your symptoms. Be fully aware of symptoms that can warn you of irregular heart rhythms and decreased blood flow to your brain, such as feeling like you may faint.	 Inform other people. Make family, friends, teachers, neighbors and anyone else who has regular contact with you aware of your heart condition. Wear some sort of medical alert identification to notify health care providers of your condition. In addition, have plans in place in the case of an emergency cardiac event. Urge family members to learn cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) so that they can provide immediate resuscitation if it ever becomes necessary. In some situations, possession of or rapid access to an automatic external defibrillator (AED) might be appropriate. 	Control startling events as much as possible. Turn down the volume on doorbells and turn off the telephone ringer or your cellphone at night.	Visit your doctor. Your cardiologist will likely recommend that you have regular follow-up appointments with him or her. Let your doctor know if you have symptoms of long QT syndrome or any changes in your condition. Your doctor may make changes to your treatment plan or suggest additional treatments for you.	
Low blood pressure (hypotension)|Dizziness or lightheadedness	Fainting (syncope)	Lack of concentration	Blurred vision	Nausea	Cold, clammy, pale skin	Rapid, shallow breathing	Fatigue	Depression	Thirst	|Drink more water, less alcohol. Alcohol is dehydrating and can lower blood pressure, even if you drink in moderation. Water, on the other hand, combats dehydration and increases blood volume.	 Follow a healthy diet. Get all the nutrients you need for good health by focusing on a variety of foods, including whole grains, fruits, vegetables, and lean chicken and fish. If your doctor suggests using more salt but you don't like a lot of salt on your food, try using natural soy sauce or adding dry soup mixes to dips and dressings. 	 Go slowly when changing body positions. You may be able to reduce the dizziness and lightheadedness that occur with low blood pressure on standing by taking it easy when you move from a prone to a standing position. Before getting out of bed in the morning, breathe deeply for a few minutes and then slowly sit up before standing. Sleeping with the head of your bed slightly elevated also can help fight the effects of gravity. If you begin to get symptoms while standing, cross your thighs in a scissors fashion and squeeze, or put one foot on a ledge or chair and lean as far forward as possible. These maneuvers encourage blood to flow from your legs to your heart. 	 Eat small, low-carb meals. To help prevent blood pressure from dropping sharply after meals, eat small portions several times a day and limit high-carbohydrate foods such as potatoes, rice, pasta and bread. Your doctor also may recommend drinking caffeinated coffee or tea with meals to temporarily raise blood pressure. But because caffeine can cause other problems, check with your doctor before drinking more caffeinated beverages. 	
Low sex drive in women|Has no interest in any type of sexual activity, including self-stimulation	Doesn't have sexual fantasies or thoughts, or only seldom has them	Is bothered by her lack of sexual activity or fantasies	|Exercise. Regular aerobic exercise and strength training can increase your stamina, improve your body image, elevate your mood and boost your libido.	Stress less. Finding a better way to cope with work stress, financial stress and daily hassles can enhance your sex drive.	Communicate with your partner. Couples who learn to communicate in an open, honest way usually maintain a stronger emotional connection, which can lead to better sex. Communicating about sex also is important. Talking about your likes and dislikes can set the stage for greater sexual intimacy.	Set aside time for intimacy. Scheduling sex into your calendar may seem contrived and boring. But making intimacy a priority can help put your sex drive back on track.	Add a little spice to your sex life. Try a different sexual position, a different time of day or a different location for sex. Ask your partner to spend more time on foreplay. If you and your partner are open to experimentation, sex toys and fantasy can help rekindle your sexual sizzle.	Ditch bad habits. Smoking, illegal drugs and excess alcohol can all dampen sexual desire. Ditching these bad habits may help rev up your sexual desire as well as improve your overall health.	
Low sperm count|Problems with sexual function — for example, low sex drive or difficulty maintaining an erection (erectile dysfunction)	Pain, swelling or a lump in the testicle area	Decreased facial or body hair or other signs of a chromosome or hormone abnormality	|Increasing the frequency of sex. Having sexual intercourse every day or every other day beginning at least four days before ovulation increases your chances of getting your partner pregnant.	Having sex when fertilization is possible. A woman is likely to become pregnant during ovulation — which occurs in the middle of the menstrual cycle, between periods. This will ensure that sperm, which can live several days, are present when conception is possible.	Avoiding lubricants. Some products such as Astroglide or K-Y jelly, lotions, and saliva might impair sperm movement and function. Ask your doctor about sperm-safe lubricants.	
Lung cancer|A new cough that doesn't go away	Changes in a chronic cough or "smoker's cough"	Coughing up blood, even a small amount	Shortness of breath	Chest pain	Wheezing	Hoarseness	Losing weight without trying	Bone pain	Headache	|Try to relax. Feeling short of breath can be scary. But fear and anxiety only make it harder to breathe. When you begin to feel short of breath, try to manage the fear by choosing an activity that helps you relax. Listen to music, imagine your favorite vacation spot, meditate or say a prayer.	Find a comfortable position. It may help to lean forward when you feel short of breath.	Focus on your breath. When you feel short of breath, focus your mind on your breathing. Instead of trying to fill your lungs with air, concentrate on moving the muscles that control your diaphragm. Try breathing through pursed lips and pacing your breaths with your activity.	Save your energy for what's important. If you're short of breath, you may become tired easily. Cut out the nonessential tasks from your day so that you can save your energy for what needs to be done.	
Lupus|Fatigue and fever	Joint pain, stiffness and swelling	Butterfly-shaped rash on the face that covers the cheeks and bridge of the nose	Skin lesions that appear or worsen with sun exposure (photosensitivity)	Fingers and toes that turn white or blue when exposed to cold or during stressful periods (Raynaud's phenomenon)	Shortness of breath	Chest pain	Dry eyes	Headaches, confusion and memory loss	|See your doctor regularly. Having regular checkups instead of only seeing your doctor when your symptoms worsen may help your doctor prevent flare-ups, and can be useful in addressing routine health concerns, such as stress, diet and exercise that can be helpful in preventing lupus complications.	Get adequate rest. People with lupus often experience persistent fatigue that's different from normal tiredness and that isn't necessarily relieved by rest. For that reason, it can be hard to judge when you need to slow down. Get plenty of sleep at night and naps or breaks during the day as needed.	Be sun smart. Because ultraviolet light can trigger a flare, wear protective clothing — such as a hat, long-sleeved shirt and long pants — and use sunscreens with a sun protection factor (SPF) of at least 55 every time you go outside.	Get regular exercise. Exercise can help you recover from a flare, reduce your risk of heart attack, help fight depression and promote general well-being.	Don't smoke. Smoking increases your risk of cardiovascular disease and can worsen the effects of lupus on your heart and blood vessels.	Eat a healthy diet. A healthy diet emphasizes fruits, vegetables and whole grains. Sometimes you may have dietary restrictions, especially if you have high blood pressure, kidney damage or gastrointestinal problems.	
Lyme disease| Rash. From 3 to 30 days after an infected tick bite, an expanding red area might appear that sometimes clears in the center, forming a bull’s-eye pattern. The rash (erythema migrans) expands slowly over days and can spread to 12 inches (30 centimeters) across. It is typically not itchy or painful. Erythema migrans is one of the hallmarks of Lyme disease. Some people develop this rash at more than one place on their bodies. 	Flu-like symptoms. Fever, chills, fatigue, body aches and a headache may accompany the rash.	|
Lymphedema|Swelling of part or all of your arm or leg, including fingers or toes	A feeling of heaviness or tightness	Restricted range of motion	Aching or discomfort	Recurring infections	Hardening and thickening of the skin (fibrosis)	|
Lymphoma|Hodgkin's lymphoma	Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma	|Hodgkin's lymphoma	Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma	
Lynch syndrome|Colon cancer that occurs at a younger age, especially before age 50	A family history of colon cancer that occurs at a young age	A family history of cancer that affects the uterus (endometrial cancer)	A family history of other related cancers, including ovarian cancer, kidney cancer, stomach cancer, small intestine cancer, liver cancer, sweat gland cancer (sebaceous carcinoma) and other cancers	|
Male breast cancer|A painless lump or thickening in your breast tissue	Changes to the skin covering your breast, such as dimpling, puckering, redness or scaling	Changes to your nipple, such as redness or scaling, or a nipple that begins to turn inward	Discharge from your nipple	|
Male hypogonadism|Female genitals	Ambiguous genitals — genitals that are neither clearly male nor clearly female	Underdeveloped male genitals	|
Male infertility|Problems with sexual function — for example, difficulty with ejaculation or small volumes of fluid ejaculated, reduced sexual desire or difficulty maintaining an erection (erectile dysfunction)	Pain, swelling or a lump in the testicle area	Recurrent respiratory infections	Inability to smell	Abnormal breast growth (gynecomastia)	Decreased facial or body hair or other signs of a chromosomal or hormonal abnormality	Having a lower than normal sperm count (fewer than 15 million sperm per milliliter of semen or a total sperm count of less than 39 million per ejaculate)	|Increase frequency of sex. Having sexual intercourse every day or every other day beginning at least 4 days before ovulation increases your chances of getting your partner pregnant.	Have sex when fertilization is possible. A woman is likely to become pregnant during ovulation — which occurs in the middle of the menstrual cycle, between periods. This will ensure that sperm, which can live several days, are present when conception is possible.	Avoid the use of lubricants. Products such as Astroglide or K-Y jelly, lotions, and saliva might impair sperm movement and function. Ask your doctor about sperm-safe lubricants.	
Mammary duct ectasia|A dirty white, greenish or black nipple discharge from one or both nipples	Tenderness in the nipple or surrounding breast tissue	Redness of the nipple and sometimes the surrounding area	A breast lump or thickening near the clogged duct	A nipple that's turned inward (inverted)	|Apply warm compresses. A warm compress applied to your nipple and surrounding area may soothe painful breast tissue.	Use breast pads for nipple discharge. Using breast pads or nursing pads can keep fluid from leaking through your clothing. These pads are available at drugstores and many retail stores that sell baby-care products.	Wear a support bra. Choose bras with good support to minimize breast discomfort. A well-fitting bra can also help keep a breast pad in place to absorb nipple discharge.	Sleep on the opposite side. Avoid sleeping on the same side of your body as your affected breast to help prevent swelling and further discomfort.	Stop smoking. Smoking may make it harder to treat an infection, and ongoing smoking may result in recurrent infections or an abscess.	
Marfan syndrome|Tall and slender build	Disproportionately long arms, legs, fingers and toes	A breastbone that protrudes outward or dips inward	A high, arched palate and crowded teeth	Heart murmurs	Extreme nearsightedness	An abnormally curved spine	Flat feet	|Treatments and drugs	Coping and support	
Mastitis|Breast tenderness or warmth to the touch	Generally feeling ill (malaise)	Breast swelling	Pain or a burning sensation continuously or while breast-feeding	Skin redness, often in a wedge-shaped pattern	Fever of 101 F (38.3 C) or greater	|Continue to breast-feed as often and as long as your baby is hungry	Rest as much as possible, preferably in bed with your baby, which will encourage frequent feedings	Avoid prolonged overfilling of your breast with milk (engorgement) before breast-feeding	Vary your breast-feeding positions	Drink plenty of fluids	If you have trouble emptying a portion of your breast, apply warm compresses to the breast or take a warm shower before breast-feeding or pumping milk	Wear a supportive bra	
Muscular dystrophy|Frequent falls	Difficulty getting up from a lying or sitting position	Trouble running and jumping	Waddling gait	Walking on the toes	Large calf muscles	Muscle pain and stiffness	Learning disabilities	|Treatments and drugs	Coping and support	
Measles|Fever	Dry cough	Runny nose	Sore throat	Inflamed eyes (conjunctivitis)	Tiny white spots with bluish-white centers on a red background found inside the mouth on the inner lining of the cheek — also called Koplik's spots	A skin rash made up of large, flat blotches that often flow into one another	|Take it easy. Get rest and avoid busy activities.	Sip something. Drink plenty of water, fruit juice and herbal tea to replace fluids lost by fever and sweating.	Seek respiratory relief. Use a humidifier to relieve cough and sore throat.	Rest your eyes. If you or your child finds bright light bothersome, as do many people with measles, keep the lights low or wear sunglasses. Also avoid reading or watching television if light from a reading lamp or from the television is bothersome.	
Melanoma|A change in an existing mole	The development of a new pigmented or unusual-looking growth on your skin	|
Membranous nephropathy|Swelling in the legs and ankles	Weight gain	Fatigue	Poor appetite	Frothy urine	Elevated fat levels in the blood (hyperlipidemia)	Increased protein levels in the urine (proteinuria)	Decreased protein levels in the blood, particularly of the protein albumin	|Have regular checkups	Follow your prescribed treatment for diabetes or high blood pressure	Lose excess weight by following a healthy diet and regular exercise program	Stop smoking, if you are a smoker	Limit use of over-the-counter pain medications	Make changes in your diet, such as eating less salt and less protein	Limit your intake of alcohol	
Meniere's disease|Recurring episodes of vertigo. You have a spinning sensation that starts and stops spontaneously. Episodes of vertigo occur without warning and usually last 20 minutes to several hours, but not more than 24 hours. Severe vertigo can cause nausea and vomiting.	Hearing loss. Hearing loss in Meniere's disease may come and go, particularly early on. Eventually, most people have some permanent hearing loss.	Ringing in the ear (tinnitus). Tinnitus is the perception of a ringing, buzzing, roaring, whistling or hissing sound in your ear.	Feeling of fullness in the ear. People with Meniere's disease often feel pressure in the affected ears (aural fullness) or on the side of their heads.	|Sit or lie down when you feel dizzy. During an episode of vertigo, avoid things that can make your signs and symptoms worse, such as sudden movement, bright lights, watching television or reading.	Rest during and after attacks. Don't rush to return to your normal activities.	Be aware you might lose your balance. Falling could lead to serious injury. Use good lighting if you get up in the night. Consider walking with a cane for stability if you have chronic balance problems.	Avoid driving a car or operating heavy machinery if you have frequent episodes of vertigo. Doing so could lead to an accident and injury.	
Meningioma|Changes in vision, such as seeing double or blurriness	Headaches that worsen with time	Hearing loss	Memory loss	Loss of smell	Seizures	Weakness in your arms or legs	|
Menopause|Irregular periods	Vaginal dryness	Hot flashes	Night sweats	Sleep problems	Mood changes	Weight gain and slowed metabolism	Thinning hair and dry skin	Loss of breast fullness	|Cool hot flashes. Dress in layers, have a cold glass of water or go somewhere cooler. Try to pinpoint what triggers your hot flashes. For many women, triggers may include hot beverages, caffeine, spicy foods, alcohol, stress, hot weather and even a warm room.	Decrease vaginal discomfort. Use over-the-counter, water-based vaginal lubricants (Astroglide, K-Y jelly, others) or moisturizers (Replens, others). Choose products that don't contain glycerin, which can cause burning or irritation in women who are sensitive to that chemical. Staying sexually active also helps by increasing blood flow to the vagina.	Get enough sleep. Avoid caffeine, which can make it hard to get to sleep, and avoid drinking too much alcohol, which can interrupt sleep. Exercise during the day, although not right before bedtime. If hot flashes disturb your sleep, you may need to find a way to manage them before you can get adequate rest.	Practice relaxation techniques. Techniques such as deep breathing, paced breathing, guided imagery, massage and progressive muscle relaxation can help relieve menopausal symptoms. You can find a number of books, CDs and online offerings on different relaxation exercises.	Strengthen your pelvic floor. Pelvic floor muscle exercises, called Kegel exercises, can improve some forms of urinary incontinence.	Eat a balanced diet. Include a variety of fruits, vegetables and whole grains. Limit saturated fats, oils and sugars. Ask your provider if you need calcium or vitamin D supplements to help meet daily requirements.	Don't smoke. Smoking increases your risk of heart disease, stroke, osteoporosis, cancer and a range of other health problems. It may also increase hot flashes and bring on earlier menopause.	Exercise regularly. Get regular physical activity or exercise on most days to help protect against heart disease, diabetes, osteoporosis and other conditions associated with aging.	
Menorrhagia|Soaking through one or more sanitary pads or tampons every hour for several consecutive hours	Needing to use double sanitary protection to control your menstrual flow	Needing to wake up to change sanitary protection during the night	Bleeding for longer than a week	Passing blood clots with menstrual flow for more than one day	Restricting daily activities due to heavy menstrual flow	Symptoms of anemia, such as tiredness, fatigue or shortness of breath	|
Menstrual cramps|Throbbing or cramping pain in your lower abdomen that may be intense	Dull, constant ache	Pain that radiates to your lower back and thighs	|Exercise. Studies have found that physical activity may ease the pain of menstrual cramps.	Heat. Soaking in a hot bath or using a heating pad, hot water bottle or heat patch on your lower abdomen may ease menstrual cramps. Applying heat may be just as effective as over-the-counter pain medication for relieving menstrual cramps.	Dietary supplements. A number of studies have indicated that vitamin E, omega-3 fatty acids, vitamin B-1 (thiamine), vitamin B-6 and magnesium supplements may effectively reduce menstrual cramps.	Avoiding alcohol and tobacco. These substances can make menstrual cramps worse.	Reducing stress. Psychological stress may increase your risk of menstrual cramps and their severity.	
Mental illness|Feeling sad or down	Confused thinking or reduced ability to concentrate	Excessive fears or worries, or extreme feelings of guilt	Extreme mood changes of highs and lows	Withdrawal from friends and activities	Significant tiredness, low energy or problems sleeping	Detachment from reality (delusions), paranoia or hallucinations	Inability to cope with daily problems or stress	Trouble understanding and relating to situations and to people	Alcohol or drug abuse	Major changes in eating habits	Sex drive changes	Excessive anger, hostility or violence	Suicidal thinking	|Stick to your treatment plan. Don't skip therapy sessions. Even if you're feeling better, don't skip your medications. If you stop, symptoms may come back. And you could have withdrawal-like symptoms if you stop a medication too suddenly. If you have bothersome drug side effects or other problems with treatment, talk to your doctor before making changes.	Avoid alcohol and drug use. Using alcohol or recreational drugs can make it difficult to treat a mental illness. If you're addicted, quitting can be a real challenge. If you can't quit on your own, see your doctor or find a support group to help you.	Stay active. Exercise can help you manage symptoms of depression, stress and anxiety. Physical activity can also counteract the effects of some psychiatric medications that may cause weight gain. Consider walking, swimming, gardening or any form of physical activity that you enjoy. Even light physical activity can make a difference.	Don't make important decisions when your symptoms are severe. Avoid decision-making when you're in the depth of mental illness symptoms, since you may not be thinking clearly.	Determine priorities. You may reduce the impact of your mental illness by managing time and energy. Cut back on obligations when necessary and set reasonable goals. Give yourself permission to do less when symptoms are worse. You may find it helpful to make a list of daily tasks or use a planner to structure your time and stay organized.	Learn to adopt a positive attitude. Focusing on the positive things in your life can make your life better and may even improve your health. Try to accept changes when they occur, and keep problems in perspective. Stress management techniques, including relaxation methods, may help.	
Meralgia paresthetica|Tingling and numbness in the outer (lateral) part of your thigh	Burning pain in or on the surface of the outer part of your thigh	|Avoid wearing tight clothing.	Maintain a healthy weight, or lose weight if you're overweight.	
Mesenteric lymphadenitis|Abdominal pain, often centered on the lower, right side, but the pain can sometimes be more widespread 	General abdominal tenderness 	Fever 	|Get plenty of rest. Adequate rest can help your child recover. 	Drink fluids. Liquids help prevent dehydration from fever, vomiting and diarrhea. 	Apply moist heat. A warm moist washcloth applied to the abdomen can help ease discomfort. 	
Mesothelioma|Chest pain under the rib cage	Painful coughing	Shortness of breath	Unusual lumps of tissue under the skin on your chest	Unexplained weight loss	|
Metabolic syndrome||Exercise. Doctors recommend getting 30 or more minutes of moderate-intensity exercise, such as brisk walking, every day.	Lose weight. Losing weight can reduce insulin resistance and blood pressure and decrease your risk of diabetes.	Eat healthy. The Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension (DASH) diet and the Mediterranean diet, like many healthy-eating plans, limit unhealthy fats and emphasize fruits, vegetables, fish and whole grains. Both of these dietary approaches have been found to offer important health benefits — in addition to weight loss — for people who have components of metabolic syndrome.	Stop smoking. Smoking cigarettes worsens the health consequences of metabolic syndrome. Talk to your doctor if you need help kicking the cigarette habit.	
Metachromatic leukodystrophy|Infantile form, occurring between ages 6 months and 2 years	Juvenile form, occurring between ages 3 and 6 (early juvenile) or between ages 6 and 16 (late juvenile)	Adult form, occurring at age 17 or older	|Infantile form, occurring between ages 6 months and 2 years	Juvenile form, occurring between ages 3 and 6 (early juvenile) or between ages 6 and 16 (late juvenile)	Adult form, occurring at age 17 or older	
Metatarsalgia|Sharp, aching or burning pain in the ball of your foot — the part of the sole just behind your toes	Pain that worsens when you stand, run, flex your feet or walk — especially barefoot on a hard surface — and improves when you rest	Sharp or shooting pain, numbness, or tingling in your toes	A feeling of having a pebble in your shoe	|Rest. Protect your foot from further injury by not stressing it. Elevate your foot after standing or walking to allow it to recover. You might need to avoid your favorite sport for a while, but you can stay fit with low-impact exercises, such as swimming or cycling.	Ice the affected area. Apply ice packs to the affected area for about 20 minutes at a time several times a day. To protect your skin, wrap the ice packs in a thin towel.	Take an over-the-counter pain reliever. Try ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin IB, others), naproxen sodium (Aleve) or aspirin to reduce pain and inflammation.	Wear proper shoes. Your doctor may recommend a shoe that's especially suited for your foot type, your stride and your particular sport.	Try shock-absorbing insoles. These off-the-shelf shoe inserts — often made of cork, plastic, rubber or a gel-like substance — fit inside your shoes to help cushion shock.	Use metatarsal pads. These off-the-shelf pads are placed in your shoes just ahead of the metatarsal bone to help deflect stress away from the painful area.	 Consider arch supports. If insoles don't help, your doctor may recommend arch supports to minimize stress on the metatarsal bones and improve foot function. Off-the-shelf arch supports come in various sizes and can be fitted immediately. More-durable arch supports can be custom-made from a foam mold or plaster cast of your foot. Rigid arch supports are made of a firm material such as plastic or carbon fiber. They're designed to control motion in two major foot joints below your ankles. Semirigid arch supports are made of softer materials such as leather and cork reinforced by silicone. Arch supports designed to treat metatarsalgia may include metatarsal pads, too. 	
MRSA infection|Warm to the touch	Full of pus or other drainage	Accompanied by a fever	|
Microcephaly|A head size significantly smaller than that of other children of the same age and sex	|
Microscopic colitis|Chronic watery diarrhea	Abdominal pain or cramps	Weight loss	Nausea	Fecal incontinence	|Drink plenty of fluids. Water is best, but fluids with added sodium and potassium (electrolytes) may help as well. Try drinking broth or watered-down fruit juice. Avoid beverages that are high in sugar or contain alcohol or caffeine, such as coffee, tea and colas, which may aggravate your symptoms.	Choose soft, easy-to-digest foods. These include applesauce, bananas and rice. Avoid high-fiber foods such as beans, nuts and vegetables. If you feel as though your symptoms are improving, slowly add high-fiber foods back to your diet.	Eat several small meals rather than a few large meals. Spacing meals throughout the day may ease diarrhea.	Avoid irritating foods. Stay away from spicy, fatty or fried foods and any other foods that make your symptoms worse.	
Migraine|Constipation	Depression	Food cravings	Hyperactivity	Irritability	Neck stiffness	Uncontrollable yawning	|Try muscle relaxation exercises. Relaxation may help ease the pain of a migraine headache. Relaxation techniques may include progressive muscle relaxation, meditation or yoga.	Get enough sleep, but don't oversleep. Get an adequate amount of sleep each night. It's best to go to bed and wake up at regular times, as well.	Rest and relax. If possible, rest in a dark, quiet room when you feel a headache coming on. Place an ice pack wrapped in a cloth on the back of your neck and apply gentle pressure to painful areas on your scalp.	Keep a headache diary. Continue keeping your headache diary even after you see your doctor. It will help you learn more about what triggers your migraines and what treatment is most effective.	
Migraine with aura|Blind spots (scotomas), which are sometimes outlined by simple geometric designs 	Zigzag lines that gradually float across your field of vision 	Shimmering spots or stars 	Changes in vision 	Flashes of light 	|
Mild cognitive impairment (MCI)|You forget things more often.	You forget important events such as appointments or social engagements.	You lose your train of thought or the thread of conversations, books or movies.	You feel increasingly overwhelmed by making decisions, planning steps to accomplish a task or interpreting instructions.	You start to have trouble finding your way around familiar environments.	You become more impulsive or show increasingly poor judgment.	Your family and friends notice any of these changes.	|Regular physical exercise has known benefits for heart health and may also help prevent or slow cognitive decline.	A diet low in fat and rich in fruits and vegetables is another heart-healthy choice that also may help protect cognitive health.	Omega-3 fatty acids also are good for the heart. Most research showing a possible benefit for cognitive health uses fish consumption as a yardstick for the amount of omega-3 fatty acids eaten.	Intellectual stimulation may prevent cognitive decline. Studies have shown computer use, playing games, reading books and other intellectual activities may help preserve function and prevent cognitive decline.	Social engagement may make life more satisfying, and help preserve mental function and slow mental decline.	Memory training and other thinking (cognitive) training may help improve your function.	
Milia||Keep your baby's face clean. Wash your baby's face daily with warm water and mild baby soap.	Dry your baby's face gently. Simply pat your baby's skin dry.	Don't pinch or scrub the bumps. You may cause more irritation or an infection.	Avoid using lotions or oils on your baby's face.	
Milk allergy|Hives	Wheezing	Vomiting	|
Miscarriage|Vaginal spotting or bleeding	Pain or cramping in your abdomen or lower back	Fluid or tissue passing from your vagina	|Treatments and drugs	Coping and support	
Mitral valve disease| Mitral valve regurgitation. In this condition, the flaps (leaflets) of the mitral valve don't close tightly, causing blood to leak backward into the left atrium of your heart. If not treated, it can result in heart muscle damage. The most common cause of blood leakage is mitral valve prolapse, in which the leaflets bulge back into the left atrium as your heart contracts. 	Mitral valve stenosis. In this condition, the flaps of the mitral valve become thick or stiff, and they may fuse together. This results in a narrowed valve opening and reduced blood flow from the left atrium to the left ventricle.	| Mitral valve regurgitation. In this condition, the flaps (leaflets) of the mitral valve don't close tightly, causing blood to leak backward into the left atrium of your heart. If not treated, it can result in heart muscle damage. The most common cause of blood leakage is mitral valve prolapse, in which the leaflets bulge back into the left atrium as your heart contracts. 	Mitral valve stenosis. In this condition, the flaps of the mitral valve become thick or stiff, and they may fuse together. This results in a narrowed valve opening and reduced blood flow from the left atrium to the left ventricle.	
Mitral valve prolapse|A racing or irregular heartbeat (arrhythmia)	Dizziness or lightheadedness	Difficulty breathing or shortness of breath, often when lying flat or during physical activity	Fatigue	Chest pain that's not caused by a heart attack or coronary artery disease	|Treatments and drugs	Prevention	
Mitral valve stenosis|Shortness of breath, especially with exertion or when you lie down	Fatigue, especially during increased physical activity	Swollen feet or legs	Heart palpitations — sensations of a rapid, fluttering heartbeat	Dizziness or fainting	Heavy coughing, sometimes with blood-tinged sputum	Chest discomfort or chest pain	Severe headache, trouble speaking or other symptoms of stroke	|Take care of your teeth. Brush and floss and see your dentist regularly.	Limit salt. Salt in food and drinks may increase pressure on your heart. Don't add salt to food, and avoid high-sodium foods. Read food labels and ask for low-salt dishes when eating out.	Maintain a healthy weight. Keep your weight within a range recommended by your doctor.	Cut back on caffeine. Caffeine can worsen irregular heartbeats (arrhythmias). Ask your doctor about drinking beverages with caffeine, such as coffee or soft drinks.	Seek prompt medical attention. If you notice frequent palpitations or feel your heart racing, seek medical help. Fast heart rhythms that aren't treated can lead to rapid deterioration in people with mitral valve stenosis.	Cut back on alcohol. Heavy alcohol use can cause arrhythmias and make symptoms worse. Ask your doctor about the effects of alcohol on your heart.	Exercise. How long and hard you're able to exercise may depend on the severity of your condition and the intensity of exercise. But everyone should engage in at least low-level, regular exercise for cardiovascular fitness. Ask your doctor for guidance before starting to exercise, especially if you're considering competitive sports.	See your doctor regularly. Establish a regular appointment schedule with your cardiologist or primary care provider.	
Mittelschmerz|On one side of your lower abdomen	Dull and cramp-like	Sharp and sudden	Accompanied by mild vaginal bleeding or discharge	Rarely, severe	|Soak in a hot bath	Use a heating pad where the pain is	
Mixed connective tissue disease|General feeling of being unwell. This malaise may be accompanied by increased fatigue and a mild fever.	Cold and numb fingers or toes (Raynaud's phenomenon). In response to cold or stress, your fingers or toes might turn white and then purplish blue. After warming, the fingers or toes turn red.	Swollen fingers or hands. Some people experience swelling to the point where the fingers resemble sausages.	Muscle and joint pain. Joints may become deformed, similar to what occurs with rheumatoid arthritis.	Rash. Red or reddish brown patches may appear over the knuckles.	|Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. Medications, such as ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin IB, others) or naproxen sodium (Aleve, others), may help relieve the pain and inflammation if your condition is mild.	Protecting hands from cold. Wearing gloves and taking other measures to keep your hands warm can help prevent Raynaud's phenomenon.	Smoking cessation. Smoking causes blood vessels to narrow, which can worsen the effects of Raynaud's phenomenon.	Reducing stress. Raynaud's phenomenon is often triggered by stress. Relaxation techniques — such as slowing and focusing on your breathing — can help reduce your stress levels.	
Molar pregnancy|Dark brown to bright red vaginal bleeding during the first trimester	Severe nausea and vomiting	Sometimes vaginal passage of grape-like cysts	Rarely pelvic pressure or pain	|
Mold allergy|Sneezing 	Runny or stuffy nose 	Cough and postnasal drip 	Itchy eyes, nose and throat 	Watery eyes 	|Sleep with your windows closed to keep out outdoor mold. The concentration of airborne mold spores tends to be greatest at night, when the weather is cool and damp. 	Wear a dust mask over your nose and mouth to keep mold spores out if you have to rake leaves, mow your lawn or work around compost. 	Avoid going outdoors at certain times, such as immediately after a rainstorm, in foggy or damp weather, or when the published mold count is high. 	
Moles|Color and texture. Moles can be brown, tan, black, red, blue or pink. They can be smooth, wrinkled, flat or raised. They may have hair growing from them.	Shape. They can vary in shape from oval to round.	Size. Moles are usually less than 1/4 inch (about 6 millimeters) in diameter — the size of a pencil eraser. Rarely, moles present at birth can be much bigger, covering wide areas of the face, torso or a limb.	|
Molluscum contagiosum|Are raised, round and flesh colored	Are small — typically under about 1/4 inch (smaller than 6 millimeters) in diameter	Characteristically have a small indentation (umbilication) or dot at the top near the center	Can become red and inflamed	May be itchy	Can be easily removed by scratching or rubbing, which can spread the virus to adjacent skin	Usually appear on the face, neck, armpits, arms and tops of the hands in children	May be seen on the genitals, lower abdomen and inner upper thighs in adults if the infection was sexually transmitted	|
Mood disorders|Major depressive disorder — prolonged and persistent periods of extreme sadness	Bipolar disorder — also called manic depression or bipolar affective disorder, depression that includes alternating times of extreme sadness (depression) and extreme happiness (mania)	Seasonal affective disorder (SAD) — a form of depression most often associated with fewer hours of daylight in the far northern and southern latitudes from late fall to early spring	Cyclothymic disorder — a disorder that causes emotional ups and downs that are less extreme than bipolar disorder	Premenstrual dysphoric disorder — mood changes and irritability that occur during the premenstrual phase of a woman's cycle and go away with the onset of menses	Persistent depressive disorder (dysthymia) — a long-term (chronic) form of depression	Disruptive mood dysregulation disorder — a disorder of chronic, severe and persistent irritability in children that often includes frequent temper outbursts that are inconsistent with the child's developmental age	Depression related to medical illness — a persistent depressed mood and a significant loss of pleasure in most or all activities that's directly related to the physical effects of another medical condition	|Major depressive disorder — prolonged and persistent periods of extreme sadness	Bipolar disorder — also called manic depression or bipolar affective disorder, depression that includes alternating times of extreme sadness (depression) and extreme happiness (mania)	Seasonal affective disorder (SAD) — a form of depression most often associated with fewer hours of daylight in the far northern and southern latitudes from late fall to early spring	Cyclothymic disorder — a disorder that causes emotional ups and downs that are less extreme than bipolar disorder	Premenstrual dysphoric disorder — mood changes and irritability that occur during the premenstrual phase of a woman's cycle and go away with the onset of menses	Persistent depressive disorder (dysthymia) — a long-term (chronic) form of depression	Disruptive mood dysregulation disorder — a disorder of chronic, severe and persistent irritability in children that often includes frequent temper outbursts that are inconsistent with the child's developmental age	Depression related to medical illness — a persistent depressed mood and a significant loss of pleasure in most or all activities that's directly related to the physical effects of another medical condition	
Morning sickness|The nausea or vomiting is severe	You pass only a small amount of urine or it's dark in color	You can't keep down liquids	You feel dizzy or faint when you stand up	Your heart races	You vomit blood	|Choose foods carefully. Select foods that are high in carbohydrates or protein, low in fat, and easy to digest. Salty foods are sometimes helpful, as are foods that contain ginger — such as ginger lollipops. Avoid greasy, spicy and fatty foods.	Snack often. Before getting out of bed in the morning, eat a few soda crackers or a piece of dry toast. Nibble throughout the day, rather than eating three larger meals. An empty stomach may make nausea worse.	Drink plenty of fluids. Sip water or ginger ale. It may also help to suck on hard candy, ice chips or ice pops.	Pay attention to nausea triggers. Avoid foods or smells that seem to make your nausea worse.	Breathe fresh air. Weather permitting, open the windows in your home or workplace. Take a daily walk outdoors.	Take care with prenatal vitamins. If you feel queasy after taking prenatal vitamins, take the vitamins at night or with a snack. It may also help to chew gum or suck on hard candy after taking your prenatal vitamin. If these steps don't help, ask your pregnancy care provider about other ways you can get the iron and vitamins you need during pregnancy.	
Morphea|Reddish or purplish oval patches of skin, often on the abdomen, chest or back	Patches that gradually develop a lighter or whitish center	Linear patches, especially when on the arms or legs	A gradual change in the affected skin, which becomes hard, thickened, dry and shiny	Loss of hair and sweat glands in the affected area over time	|Treatments and drugs	Alternative medicine	
Morton's neuroma|A feeling as if you're standing on a pebble in your shoe	A burning pain in the ball of your foot that may radiate into your toes	Tingling or numbness in your toes	|Take anti-inflammatory medications. Over-the-counter nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory medications, such as ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin IB, others) and naproxen (Aleve), can reduce swelling and relieve pain.	Try ice massage. Regular ice massage may help reduce pain. Freeze a water-filled paper cup or plastic foam cup and roll the ice over the painful site.	Change your footwear. Avoid high heels or tight shoes. Choose shoes with a broad toe box and extra depth.	Take a break. For a few weeks, reduce activities such as jogging, aerobic exercise or dancing that subject your feet to high impact.	
Mosquito bites|A puffy, white and reddish bump that appears a few minutes after the bite	A hard, itchy, reddish-brown bump, or multiple bumps, appearing a day or so after the bite or bites	Small blisters instead of hard bumps	Dark spots that look like bruises	|Apply a lotion, cream or paste. Putting calamine lotion or nonprescription hydrocortisone cream on the bite can help ease the itch. Or try dabbing the bite with a paste made of baking soda and water. Reapply several times daily until your symptoms go away.	Apply a cool compress. Try soothing the bite by applying a cold pack or a cool, moist cloth for a few minutes.	Take an oral antihistamine. For stronger reactions, try taking a nonprescription antihistamine (Benadryl, Chlor-Trimeton, others).	
Multiple system atrophy (MSA)|Rigid muscles and difficulty bending your arms and legs	Slow movement (bradykinesia)	Tremors (rare in MSA compared with classic Parkinson's disease)	Impaired posture and balance	|Take steps to raise your blood pressure. Add a little salt to the diet and drink more fluids. Salt and fluids can increase blood volume and thus raise your blood pressure. Drink coffee and other caffeinated fluids to raise your blood pressure.	Elevate the head of your bed. Raising the head of your bed to about a 30-degree angle will minimize increases in blood pressure when you sleep. Get up slowly from a reclining position.	Make dietary changes. Add more fiber to your diet in order to ease constipation. You may also benefit from over-the-counter laxatives. Avoid alcohol, and consume small meals.	Avoid getting too hot. Stay in air-conditioned rooms on very hot days. Avoid excessive amounts of heat in the bathroom when bathing.	Wear elastic support stockings up to your waist. This can help keep your blood pressure from dropping.	
Multiple myeloma|Bone pain, especially in your spine or chest	Nausea	Constipation	Loss of appetite	Mental fogginess or confusion	Fatigue	Frequent infections	Weight loss	Weakness or numbness in your legs	Excessive thirst	|
Mumps|Swollen, painful salivary glands on one or both sides of your face (parotitis)	Fever	Headache	Muscle aches	Weakness and fatigue	Loss of appetite	Pain while chewing or swallowing	|Rest in bed until the fever goes away.	Isolate yourself or your child to prevent spreading the disease to others. Someone with mumps may be contagious up to a week after the onset of signs and symptoms.	 Take over-the-counter pain relievers, such as acetaminophen (Tylenol, others) or a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug such as ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin IB, others) to ease symptoms. Adults may also use aspirin. Use caution when giving aspirin to children or teenagers. Children and teenagers recovering from flu-like symptoms should never take aspirin. This is because aspirin has been linked to Reye's syndrome, a rare but potentially life-threatening condition, in such children. 	Use a warm or cold compress to ease the pain of swollen glands.	Wear an athletic supporter and use cold compresses to ease the pain of tender testicles.	Avoid foods that require lots of chewing. Instead, try broth-based soups or soft foods, such as mashed potatoes or cooked oatmeal, for nourishment.	Avoid sour foods, such as citrus fruits or juices, which stimulate saliva production.	Drink plenty of fluids.	
Myasthenia gravis|Drooping of one or both eyelids (ptosis).	Double vision (diplopia), which may be horizontal or vertical, and improves or resolves when one eye is closed.	|Adjust your eating routine. Try to eat when you have good muscle strength. Take your time chewing your food, and take a break between bites of food. Small meals eaten several times a day may be easier to handle. Also, try eating mainly soft foods and avoid foods that require more chewing, such as raw fruits or vegetables.	Use safety precautions at home. Install grab bars or railings in places where you may need support, such as next to the bathtub or next to steps. Keep your floors clean, and move any loose rugs out of areas where you may walk. Outside your home, keep paths, sidewalks and driveways cleared of leaves, snow and other potential debris that could cause you to stumble.	Use electric appliances and power tools. You may lose energy quickly when conducting tasks. Try using an electric toothbrush, electric can openers and other electrical tools to perform tasks when possible.	Wear an eye patch. Consider wearing an eye patch if you have double vision, as this can help relieve the problem. Try wearing the eye patch while you write, read or watch television. Periodically switch the eye patch to the other eye to help reduce eyestrain.	Plan. If you have chores, shopping or errands to do, plan the activity to coincide with the time at which you have the most energy. Also, try to reduce extra walking in your house when working on projects, as it may reduce your energy.	
Myelodysplastic syndromes|Fatigue	Shortness of breath	Unusual paleness (pallor) due to anemia	Easy or unusual bruising or bleeding	Pinpoint-sized red spots just beneath your skin caused by bleeding (petechiae)	Frequent infections	|Wash your hands. Reduce your risk of infection by frequently washing your hands. Wash your hands thoroughly with warm, soapy water, especially before eating or preparing food. Carry an alcohol-based hand sanitizer for times when water isn't available.	Take care with food. Thoroughly cook all meat and fish. Avoid fruits and vegetables that you can't peel, especially lettuce, and wash all produce you do use before peeling. To be absolutely safe, you may want to avoid raw foods entirely.	Avoid people who are ill. Because myelodysplastic syndromes can affect your immune system, try to avoid close contact with anyone who is sick, including family members and co-workers.	
Myelofibrosis|Feeling tired, weak or short of breath, usually because of anemia	Pain or fullness below your ribs on the left side, due to an enlarged spleen	Pale skin	Easy bruising	Easy bleeding	Excessive sweating during sleep (night sweats)	Fever	Frequent infections	Bone pain	|
Myocardial ischemia|Neck or jaw pain	Shoulder or arm pain	A fast heartbeat	Shortness of breath when you are physically active	Nausea and vomiting	Sweating	Fatigue	|Quit smoking. Talk to your doctor about smoking cessation strategies. Also try to avoid secondhand smoke.	Manage underlying health conditions. Treat diseases or conditions that can increase your risk of myocardial ischemia, such as diabetes, high blood pressure and high blood cholesterol.	Eat a healthy diet. Limit saturated fat and eat lots of whole grains, fruits and vegetables. Know your cholesterol numbers and ask your doctor if you've reduced them to the recommended level.	Exercise. Talk to your doctor about starting a safe exercise plan to improve blood flow to your heart.	Maintain a healthy weight. If you're overweight, talk to your doctor about weight-loss options.	Decrease stress. Practice healthy techniques for managing stress, such as muscle relaxation and deep breathing.	
Myocarditis|Chest pain	Rapid or abnormal heart rhythms (arrhythmias)	Shortness of breath, at rest or during physical activity	Fluid retention with swelling of your legs, ankles and feet	Fatigue	Other signs and symptoms you'd have with a viral infection, such as a headache, body aches, joint pain, fever, a sore throat or diarrhea	|Treatments and drugs	Prevention	
Myofascial pain syndrome|Deep, aching pain in a muscle	Pain that persists or worsens	A tender knot in a muscle	Difficulty sleeping due to pain	|Exercise. Gentle exercise can help you cope better with pain. When your pain allows, get moving. Ask your doctor or physical therapist about appropriate exercises.	Relax. If you're stressed and tense, you may experience more pain. Find ways to relax. Meditating, writing in a journal or talking with friends can all be helpful.	Take care of your body. Eat a healthy diet full of fruits and vegetables. Get enough sleep so that you wake rested. Take care of your body so that you can put your energy toward coping with your pain.	
Naegleria infection|A change in the sense of smell or taste	Fever	Sudden, severe headache	Stiff neck	Sensitivity to light	Nausea and vomiting	Confusion	Loss of balance	Sleepiness 	Seizures	Hallucinations	|
Nail fungus|Thickened	Brittle, crumbly or ragged	Distorted in shape	Dull, with no shine	A dark color, caused by debris building up under your nail	| Try over-the-counter antifungal nail creams and ointments. Several products are available. If you notice white markings on the surface of the nail, file them off, soak your nails in water, dry them, and apply the medicated cream or lotion. If you have athlete's foot as well as nail fungus, treat the athlete's foot with medicated powders or sprays and keep your feet clean and dry. 	Apply Vicks VapoRub. Many people have had success with Vicks VapoRub. One study of 18 patients showed that 56 percent had partial improvement of signs and symptoms, and 17 percent saw no improvement. To use this method, apply a small amount of the product daily with a cotton swab.	 Trim and thin the nails. This helps reduce pain by reducing pressure on the nails. Also, if you do this before applying an antifungal, the drug can reach deeper layers of the nail. Before trimming or using a nail file to thin thick nails, soften them. You can do this with the following nightly routine: Apply urea cream to affected nails, cover them with a bandage, and wash off the urea with soap and water in the morning. Repeat until the nails soften. Protect the skin around your nails with petroleum jelly. If you have a condition that causes poor blood flow to your feet and you can't trim your nails, see a health care provider regularly to have your nails trimmed. 	
Narcissistic personality disorder|Having an exaggerated sense of self-importance	Expecting to be recognized as superior even without achievements that warrant it	Exaggerating your achievements and talents	Being preoccupied with fantasies about success, power, brilliance, beauty or the perfect mate	Believing that you are superior and can only be understood by or associate with equally special people	Requiring constant admiration	Having a sense of entitlement	Expecting special favors and unquestioning compliance with your expectations	Taking advantage of others to get what you want	Having an inability or unwillingness to recognize the needs and feelings of others	Being envious of others and believing others envy you	Behaving in an arrogant or haughty manner	|Keep an open mind. Focus on the rewards of treatment.	Stick to your treatment plan. Attend scheduled therapy sessions and take any medications as directed. Remember, it can be hard work and you may have occasional setbacks.	Learn about it. Educate yourself about narcissistic personality disorder so you can better understand symptoms, risk factors and treatments.	Get treatment for substance abuse or other mental health problems. Your addictions, depression, anxiety and stress can feed off each other, leading to a cycle of emotional pain and unhealthy behavior.	Learn relaxation and stress management. Try stress-reduction techniques, such as meditation, yoga or tai chi. These can be soothing and calming.	Stay focused on your goal. Recovery from narcissistic personality disorder takes time. Stay motivated by keeping your recovery goals in mind and reminding yourself that you can work to repair damaged relationships and become happier with your life.	
Narcolepsy| Excessive daytime sleepiness. People with narcolepsy fall asleep without warning, anywhere, anytime. For example, you may suddenly nod off while working or talking with friends. You may sleep for a few minutes or up to a half-hour before awakening and feeling refreshed, but eventually you fall asleep again. You also may experience decreased alertness throughout the day. Excessive daytime sleepiness usually is the first symptom to appear and is often the most troublesome, making it difficult for you to concentrate and fully function. 	 Sudden loss of muscle tone. This condition, called cataplexy (KAT-uh-plek-see), can cause a number of physical changes, from slurred speech to complete weakness of most muscles, and may last for a few seconds to a few minutes. Cataplexy is uncontrollable and is triggered by intense emotions, usually positive ones such as laughter or excitement, but sometimes fear, surprise or anger. For example, your head may droop uncontrollably or your knees may suddenly buckle when you laugh. Some people with narcolepsy experience only one or two episodes of cataplexy a year, while others have numerous episodes daily. Not everyone with narcolepsy experiences cataplexy. 	 Sleep paralysis. People with narcolepsy often experience a temporary inability to move or speak while falling asleep or upon waking. These episodes are usually brief — lasting a few seconds or minutes — but can be frightening. You may be aware of the condition and have no difficulty recalling it afterward, even if you had no control over what was happening to you. This sleep paralysis mimics the type of temporary paralysis that normally occurs during rapid eye movement (REM) sleep, the period of sleep during which most dreaming occurs. This temporary immobility during REM sleep may prevent your body from acting out dream activity. Not everyone with sleep paralysis has narcolepsy, however. Many people without narcolepsy experience some episodes of sleep paralysis, especially in young adulthood. 	Hallucinations. These hallucinations are called hypnagogic hallucinations if they happen as you fall asleep and hypnopompic hallucinations if they occur upon waking. They may be particularly vivid and frightening because you may be semi-awake when you begin dreaming and you experience your dreams as reality.	|Stick to a schedule. Go to sleep and wake up at the same time every day, including weekends.	Take naps. Schedule short naps at regular intervals during the day. Naps of 20 minutes at strategic times during the day may be refreshing and reduce sleepiness for one to three hours. Some people may need longer naps.	Avoid nicotine and alcohol. Using these substances, especially at night, can worsen your signs and symptoms.	Get regular exercise. Moderate, regular exercise at least four to five hours before bedtime may help you feel more awake during the day and sleep better at night.	
Nasal polyps|A runny nose	Persistent stuffiness	Postnasal drip	Decreased or absent sense of smell	Loss of sense of taste	Facial pain or headache	Pain in your upper teeth	A sense of pressure over your forehead and face	Snoring	Itching around your eyes	|
Nasopharyngeal carcinoma|A lump in your neck caused by a swollen lymph node	Blood in your saliva	Bloody discharge from your nose	Nasal congestion	Hearing loss	Frequent ear infections	Headaches	|Brush your teeth several times each day. Use a soft-bristled toothbrush and gently brush your teeth several times each day. Tell your doctor if your mouth becomes too sensitive to tolerate gentle brushing.	Rinse your mouth with a warm saltwater solution after meals. Make a mild solution of warm water, salt and baking soda. Rinse your mouth with this solution after each meal.	Keep your mouth moistened with water or sugarless candies. Drink water throughout the day to keep your mouth moistened. Also try sugarless gum or sugarless candies to stimulate your mouth to produce saliva.	Choose moist foods. Avoid dry foods. Moisten dry food with sauce, gravy, broth, butter or milk.	Avoid acidic or spicy foods and drinks. Choose foods and drinks that won't irritate your mouth. Avoid caffeinated and alcoholic beverages.	
Nearsightedness|Blurry vision when looking at distant objects	The need to squint or partially close the eyelids to see clearly	Headaches caused by eyestrain	Difficulty seeing while driving a vehicle, especially at night (night myopia)	|Have your eyes checked. Do this regularly even if you see well.	Control chronic health conditions. Certain conditions, such as diabetes and high blood pressure, can affect your vision if you don't receive proper treatment.	Protect your eyes from the sun. Wear sunglasses that block ultraviolet (UV) radiation.	Prevent eye injuries. Wear protective eyewear when doing certain things, such as playing sports, mowing the lawn, painting or using other products with toxic fumes.	Eat healthy foods. Try to eat plenty of fruits, leafy greens and other vegetables. And studies show that your eyes benefit if you also include in your diet fish high in omega-3 fatty acids, such as tuna and salmon.	Don't smoke. Just as smoking isn't good for the rest of your body, smoking can adversely affect your eye health as well.	Use the right corrective lenses. The right lenses optimize your vision. Having regular exams will ensure that your prescription is correct.	Reduce eyestrain. Look away from your computer or near-task work, including reading, every few minutes.	Recognize symptoms. You may have a serious medical problem if you have a sudden loss of vision in one eye, experience sudden hazy or blurred vision, or see flashes of light, black spots, or halos around lights. These may indicate certain conditions, such as glaucoma, stroke, or a retinal tear or detachment. See your doctor immediately if you experience any of these symptoms.	
Neck pain|Pain that's often worsened by holding your head in one place for long periods, such as when driving or working at a computer	Muscle tightness and spasms	Decreased ability to move your head	Headache	|Over-the-counter pain relievers. Try over-the-counter pain relievers, such as ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin IB, others), naproxen sodium (Aleve) and acetaminophen (Tylenol, others).	Alternate heat and cold. Reduce inflammation by applying cold, such as an ice pack or ice wrapped in a towel, for up to 20 minutes several times a day. Or alternate the cold treatment with heat. Try taking a warm shower or using a heating pad on the low setting.	Home exercises. Begin daily gentle stretching, including neck rolls and shoulder rolls, once the worst of your pain has subsided. Gently tilt, bend and rotate your neck. Warm your neck and back with a heating pad or in the shower or bath before doing these exercises. Your doctor or a physical therapist can instruct you in doing these exercises.	
Nephrotic syndrome|Severe swelling (edema), particularly around your eyes and in your ankles and feet	Foamy urine, which may be caused by excess protein in your urine	Weight gain due to excess fluid retention	|Choose lean sources of protein	Reduce the amount of fat and cholesterol in your diet to help control your blood cholesterol levels	Eat a low-salt diet to help control the swelling (edema) you experience	
Neurodermatitis|An itchy skin patch or patches	Leathery or scaly texture on the affected areas	A raised, rough patch or patches that are red or darker than the rest of your skin	|Stop rubbing and scratching. The itching may be intense, but rubbing and scratching worsen the situation.	Apply cool, wet compresses. These may soothe the skin and relieve the itch. Putting a cool, wet compress on the affected skin for a few minutes before you apply a medicated cream helps it soak into the skin.	Try over-the-counter medications. Apply an anti-itch cream or lotion to the affected area. A hydrocortisone cream can temporarily relieve the itch. An oral antihistamine, such as diphenhydramine (Benadryl, others) can relieve severe itching and help you sleep. Some people have had success with capsaicin (kap-SAY-ih-sin) cream, but it may sting at first.	Cover the affected area. Bandages or dressings can help protect the skin and prevent scratching. These may be especially useful if you scratch during your sleep.	Keep your nails trimmed. Short nails may do less damage to the skin, especially if you tend to scratch while you're asleep.	Take warm baths and moisturize your skin. Prepare your bath with warm — not hot — water. Sprinkle in baking soda, uncooked oatmeal or colloidal oatmeal (Aveeno, others). Use mild soaps without dyes or perfumes. After washing, apply unscented moisturizer to protect your skin.	Avoid triggers. Notice what seems to bring on a recurrence and avoid it. For example, use stress management techniques and wear clothing that isn't itchy.	
Neuroendocrine tumors|Carcinoid tumors of the lung, intestinal tract or thymus	Pancreatic neuroendocrine tumor, also known as islet cell cancer	Medullary thyroid carcinoma	Merkel cell carcinoma, also known as neuroendocrine carcinoma of the skin	Pheochromocytoma of the adrenal gland	Adrenal cancer	Small cell carcinoma, most commonly of the lung	Large cell carcinoid tumor, most commonly of the lung	|Carcinoid tumors of the lung, intestinal tract or thymus	Pancreatic neuroendocrine tumor, also known as islet cell cancer	Medullary thyroid carcinoma	Merkel cell carcinoma, also known as neuroendocrine carcinoma of the skin	Pheochromocytoma of the adrenal gland	Adrenal cancer	Small cell carcinoma, most commonly of the lung	Large cell carcinoid tumor, most commonly of the lung	
Nickel allergy|Rash or bumps on the skin 	Itching, which may be severe 	Redness or changes in skin color 	Dry patches of skin that may resemble a burn 	Blisters and draining fluid in severe cases 	|Use soothing lotions, such as calamine lotion, which may ease itching. 	Moisturize regularly. Your skin has a natural barrier that's disrupted when it reacts to nickel and other allergens. Using emollient creams or lotions, such as petroleum jelly or mineral oil, could reduce your need for topical corticosteroids. 	Apply wet compresses, which can help dry blisters and relieve itching. Soak a clean cloth in Burow's solution, an over-the-counter medication containing aluminum acetate; diluted white vinegar (1 ounce of white vinegar to 16 ounces of water); or tap water. Place the compress over the rash for 15 to 45 minutes. You can repeat this process several times a day. 	Apply over-the-counter topical corticosteroids (hydrocortisone), which may lessen itching and improve the rash. You can apply to the affected area before applying a wet compress to allow better penetration into the skin. Talk to your doctor about how long you can safely use the product. 	Try over-the-counter oral antihistamines, such as diphenhydramine (Benadryl), which may help relieve itching for a short time, but tend not to be effective for this type of allergy. 	
Nicotine dependence|You can't stop smoking. You've made one or more serious, but unsuccessful, attempts to stop. 	You experience withdrawal symptoms when you try to stop. Your attempts at stopping have caused physical and mood-related signs and symptoms, such as strong cravings, anxiety, irritability, restlessness, difficulty concentrating, depressed mood, frustration, anger, increased hunger, insomnia, constipation or diarrhea. 	You keep smoking despite health problems. Even though you've developed problems with your lungs or your heart, you haven't been able to stop. 	You give up social or recreational activities in order to smoke. You may stop going to smoke-free restaurants or stop socializing with certain family members or friends because you can't smoke in these locations or situations. 	|Exercise regularly. Regular physical activity has been found to reduce withdrawal symptoms and help people stop smoking. Exercise also helps avoid potential weight gain often associated with stopping. 	Wait out cravings. Cravings or urges usually last less than five minutes. Wash the dishes, go for a walk or have a healthy snack, such as carrots, an apple or sunflower seeds, which will keep your mouth busy. Pursue something that keeps your hands busy, and before you know it, the urge will have passed. Make sure you get rid of tobacco supplies when you decide to quit. Don't save a just-in-case pack. 	Identify rationalizations. If you find yourself thinking, "I'll just smoke one to get through this tough time" or "Just one won't hurt," recognize it as a message that can derail your plan. Review your reasons for quitting, and replace that thought with something positive to support your stopping. 	Talk to a support person. If you're feeling anxious or depressed or need encouragement, a support person can help you get through a difficult craving. 	Avoid high-risk situations. Know your triggers, and stay away from people, places and situations that tempt you to smoke. 	Be realistic about the energy and time it takes to stop smoking. Adjust your schedule to a lighter workload. Take time to do something fun or simply relax. 	Eat regular, healthy meals. Include plenty of fruits and vegetables, and drink more water. 	
Nightmare disorder|Your dream seems vivid and real, often becoming more disturbing as the dream unfolds	Your dream storyline is usually related to threats to your safety or survival	Your dream wakes you	You feel scared, anxious, angry, sad or disgusted as a result of your dream	You feel sweaty or have a pounding heartbeat, but do not leave the bed	You can think clearly upon awakening and can recall details of your dream	Your dream occurs near the end of your sleep time	Your dream keeps you from falling back to sleep easily	|Offering comfort. After your child awakens from a nightmare, respond quickly and soothe your child at the bedside. This may prevent future nightmares.	Talk about the dream. Ask your child to describe the nightmare. What happened? Who was in the dream? What made it scary? Then remind your child that nightmares aren't real and can't hurt you.	Put stress in its place. If your child seems anxious or stressed, talk about what's bothering him or her. Practice some simple stress-relief activities, such as deep breathing.	Rewrite the ending. As in imagery rehearsal therapy, help your child imagine a happy ending for the nightmare. Encourage your child to draw a picture of the nightmare, "talk" to the characters in the nightmare or write about the nightmare in a journal.	Provide company. Your child might feel more secure if he or she sleeps with a favorite stuffed animal, blanket or other comfort object.	Brighten up. Use a night light in your child's room. If your child wakes up during the night, the light might be reassuring.	Open the doors. Leave your child's door open at night so that he or she won't feel alone. Leave your door open, too, in case your child needs comfort during the night.	
Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease|Fatigue	Pain in the upper right abdomen	Weight loss	|Lose weight. If you're overweight or obese, reduce the number of calories you eat each day and increase your physical activity in order to lose weight. If you've tried to lose weight in the past and have been unsuccessful, ask your doctor for help.	Choose a healthy diet. Eat a healthy diet that's rich in fruits, vegetables and whole grains.	Exercise and be more active. Aim for at least 30 minutes of exercise most days of the week. If you're trying to lose weight, you might find that more exercise is helpful. But if you don't already exercise regularly, get your doctor's OK first and start slowly.	Control your diabetes. Follow your doctor's instructions to stay in control of your diabetes. Take your medications as directed and closely monitor your blood sugar.	Lower your cholesterol. A healthy plant-based diet, exercise and medications can help keep your cholesterol and your triglycerides at healthy levels.	Protect your liver. Avoid things that will put extra stress on your liver. For instance, don't drink alcohol. Follow the instructions on all medications and over-the-counter drugs.	
Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma|Painless, swollen lymph nodes in your neck, armpits or groin	Abdominal pain or swelling	Chest pain, coughing or trouble breathing	Fatigue	Fever	Night sweats	Weight loss	|
Nonmelanoma skin cancer|Basal cell carcinoma	Squamous cell carcinoma	Angiosarcoma	Cutaneous B-cell lymphoma	Cutaneous T-cell lymphoma	Dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans	Merkel cell carcinoma 	Sebaceous gland carcinoma	Cancer that spreads from other areas of the body to the skin, such as breast cancer and mouth cancer	|Basal cell carcinoma	Squamous cell carcinoma	Angiosarcoma	Cutaneous B-cell lymphoma	Cutaneous T-cell lymphoma	Dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans	Merkel cell carcinoma 	Sebaceous gland carcinoma	Cancer that spreads from other areas of the body to the skin, such as breast cancer and mouth cancer	
Nonulcer stomach pain|A burning sensation or discomfort in your upper abdomen or lower chest, sometimes relieved by food or antacids	Bloating	Belching	An early feeling of fullness when eating	Nausea	| Eat smaller, more-frequent meals. Having an empty stomach can sometimes produce nonulcer stomach pain. Nothing but acid in your stomach may make you feel sick. Try eating a small snack, such as a cracker or a piece of fruit. Avoid skipping meals. Avoid large meals and overeating. Eat smaller meals more frequently. 	Avoid trigger foods. Some foods may trigger nonulcer stomach pain, such as fatty and spicy foods, carbonated beverages, caffeine, and alcohol.	Chew your food slowly and thoroughly. Allow time for leisurely meals.	
Noonan syndrome|Early infancy. A baby younger than 1 month old may have wide-set and down-slanting eyes, low-set ears, a deep groove and wide peaks in the upper lip, a short neck, and a low hairline on the back of the head. 	Infancy. An infant may have prominent eyes with a downward slant and thickened lids, and a nose that's depressed at the top, with a wide base and bulbous tip. 	Childhood. A child's face may appear expressionless, and his or her facial features may appear coarse or elongated. 	Adolescence. An adolescent's face is typically wide at the forehead tapering to a pointed chin. The facial features become sharper and the eyes are less prominent, and the neck lengthens to reveal extra folds of skin (webbed neck) or prominent neck (trapezius) muscles. 	Adulthood. When a child with Noonan syndrome reaches adulthood, the crease that runs from the edge of the nose to the corner of the mouth becomes prominent and the skin may be wrinkled and appear transparent. 	|
Norovirus infection|Nausea	Vomiting	Abdominal pain or cramps	Watery or loose diarrhea	Malaise	Low-grade fever	Muscle pain	|Soup	Starches and cereals, such as potatoes, noodles, rice or crackers	Banana	Yogurt	Broiled vegetables	
Obesity||Learning about your condition. Education about obesity can help you learn more about why you became obese and what you can do about it. You may feel more empowered to take control and stick to your treatment plan. Read reputable self-help books and consider talking about them with your doctor or therapist.	Setting realistic goals. When you have to lose a significant amount of weight, you may set goals that are unrealistic, such as trying to lose too much too fast. Don't set yourself up for failure. Set daily or weekly goals for exercise and weight loss. Make small changes in your diet instead of attempting drastic changes that you're not likely to stick with for the long haul.	Sticking to your treatment plan. Changing a lifestyle you may have lived with for many years can be difficult. Be honest with your doctor, therapist or other health care providers if you find your activity or eating goals slipping. You can work together to come up with new ideas or new approaches.	Enlisting support. Get your family and friends on board with your weight-loss goals. Surround yourself with people who will support you and help you, not sabotage your efforts. Make sure they understand how important weight loss is to your health. You might also want to join a weight-loss support group.	Keeping a record. Keep a food and activity log. This record can help you remain accountable for your eating and exercise habits. You can discover behavior that may be holding you back and, conversely, what works well for you. You can also use your log to track other important health parameters such as blood pressure and cholesterol levels and overall fitness.	Identifying and avoiding food triggers. Distract yourself from your desire to eat with something positive, such as calling a friend. Practice saying no to unhealthy foods and big portions. Eat when you're actually hungry — not simply when the clock says it's time to eat.	Taking your medications as directed. If you take weight-loss medications or medications to treat obesity-related conditions, such as high blood pressure or diabetes, take them exactly as prescribed. If you have a problem sticking with your medication regimen or have unpleasant side effects, talk to your doctor.	
Obsessive-compulsive disorder|Fear of contamination or dirt	Having things orderly and symmetrical	Aggressive or horrific thoughts about harming yourself or others	Unwanted thoughts, including aggression, or sexual or religious subjects	|Take your medications as directed. Even if you're feeling well, resist any temptation to skip your medications. If you stop, OCD symptoms are likely to return.	Pay attention to warning signs. You and your doctors may have identified issues that can trigger your OCD symptoms. Make a plan so that you know what to do if symptoms return. Contact your doctor or therapist if you notice any changes in symptoms or how you feel.	Check first before taking other medications. Contact the doctor who's treating you for OCD before you take medications prescribed by another doctor or before taking any over-the-counter medications, vitamins, minerals or herbal supplements. These may interact with your OCD medications.	
Occupational asthma|Wheezing, sometimes just at night	Coughing	Shortness of breath	Chest tightness	|
Ocular rosacea|Dry eyes	Burning or stinging in the eyes	Itchy eyes	Grittiness or feeling of having a foreign body in the eye or eyes	Blurred vision	Sensitivity to light (photophobia)	Redness	Dilated small blood vessels on the white part of the eye that are visible when you look in a mirror	Red, swollen eyelids	Tearing	|Keep your eyelids clean by gently washing them at least twice a day with warm water or a product your doctor recommends.	Avoid makeup if your eyes are inflamed. When you're able to wear makeup, choose types that are nonoily (noncomedogenic) and free of fragrance.	Avoid wearing contact lenses during flare-ups, especially if your symptoms include dry eyes.	Prevent flare-ups by avoiding things that trigger or worsen your rosacea or ocular rosacea, if possible. Items that tend to dilate blood vessels in the face include hot, spicy foods and alcoholic beverages.	Use artificial tears to relieve dryness. Ask your doctor for guidance.	
Oppositional defiant disorder (ODD)|Includes at least four symptoms from any of these categories — angry and irritable mood; argumentative and defiant behavior; or vindictiveness	Occurs with at least one individual who is not a sibling	Occurs on its own, rather than as part of the course of another mental health problem, such as a substance use disorder, depression or bipolar disorder	Lasts at least six months	|Recognize and praise your child's positive behaviors. Be as specific as possible, such as, "I really liked the way you helped pick up your toys tonight."	Model the behavior you want your child to have.	Pick your battles and avoid power struggles. Almost everything can turn into a power struggle, if you let it.	Set limits and enforce consistent reasonable consequences.	Set up a routine by developing a consistent daily schedule for your child. Asking your child to help develop that routine may be beneficial.	Build in time together by developing a consistent weekly schedule that involves you and your child spending time together.	Work with your partner or others in your household to ensure consistent and appropriate discipline procedures. Enlist support from teachers, coaches and other adults who spend time with your child.	Assign a household chore that's essential and that won't get done unless the child does it. Initially, it's important to set your child up for success with tasks that are relatively easy to achieve and gradually blend in more important and challenging expectations. Give clear, easy-to-follow instructions.	Be prepared for challenges early on. At first, your child probably won't be cooperative or appreciate your changed response to his or her behavior. Expect behavior to temporarily worsen in the face of new expectations. This is called an "extinction burst" by behavior therapists. Remaining consistent in the face of increasingly challenging behavior is the key to success at this early stage.	
Ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome|Mild to moderate abdominal pain that may come and go	Abdominal bloating or increased waist size	Nausea	Vomiting	Diarrhea	Tenderness in the area of your ovaries	|Try an over-the-counter painkiller such as acetaminophen (Tylenol, others) or ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin IB, others) for abdominal discomfort	Avoid sexual intercourse, as it may be painful and can cause a cyst in your ovary to rupture	Maintain a light physical activity level, avoiding strenuous or high-impact activities	Weigh yourself on the same scale and measure around your abdomen each day, reporting unusual increases to your doctor	Call your doctor if your signs and symptoms get worse	
Optic neuritis|Pain. Most people who develop optic neuritis experience eye pain that's worsened by eye movement. Sometimes the pain feels like a dull ache behind the eye.	Vision loss. Most people experience at least some temporary reduction in vision, but the extent of vision loss varies. Noticeable vision loss usually develops over hours or days. Exercise or a hot bath or shower may exaggerate the vision loss. Vision loss is permanent in some cases.	Loss of color vision. Optic neuritis often affects color perception. You might notice that colors appear less vivid than normal.	Flashing lights. Some people with optic neuritis report seeing flashing or flickering lights.	|
Oral thrush|Creamy white lesions on your tongue, inner cheeks, and sometimes on the roof of your mouth, gums and tonsils	Slightly raised lesions with a cottage cheese-like appearance	Redness or soreness that may be severe enough to cause difficulty eating or swallowing	Slight bleeding if the lesions are rubbed or scraped	Cracking and redness at the corners of your mouth (especially in denture wearers)	A cottony feeling in your mouth	Loss of taste	|Practice good oral hygiene. Brush at least twice a day and floss at least once daily. Replace your toothbrush often until your infection clears up. If you have problems with strength or dexterity in your hands, an electric toothbrush can make brushing easier. Avoid mouthwash (unless your doctor recommends a specific mouth rinse) or sprays — they can alter the normal flora in your mouth. Don't share toothbrushes. Ask your dentist for the best way to disinfect your dentures.	Try warm saltwater rinses. Dissolve 1/2 teaspoon (2.5 milliliters) of salt in 1 cup (237 milliliters) of warm water. Swish the rinse and then spit it out, but don't swallow.	Use nursing pads. If you're breast-feeding and develop a fungal infection, use pads to help prevent the fungus from spreading to your clothes. Look for pads that don't have a plastic barrier, which can encourage the growth of candida. If you're not using disposable pads, wash the nursing pads and your bras in hot water with bleach.	
Oral lichen planus|Lacy, white, raised patches of tissues	Red, swollen, tender patches of tissues	Open sores	|Practicing good oral hygiene. Keep your mouth clean to reduce your symptoms and help prevent infection. Gently brush your teeth at least twice a day and floss daily. See your dentist twice a year for checkups and cleanings, or more often as directed by your dentist.	Adjust your diet. Cut out spicy or acidic foods if they seem to trigger or worsen your symptoms. And reduce or eliminate the use of caffeine, alcohol or tobacco.	
Orchitis|Swelling in one or both testicles 	Pain ranging from mild to severe 	Tenderness in one or both testicles, which may last for weeks 	Fever 	Nausea and vomiting 	|Rest in bed	Lie down so that your scrotum is elevated	Apply cold packs to your scrotum as tolerated	Avoid lifting heavy objects	
Orthostatic hypotension (postural hypotension)|Feeling lightheaded or dizzy after standing up	Blurry vision	Weakness	Fainting (syncope)	Confusion	Nausea	|Use more salt in your diet. This must be done with care, and only after discussing it with your doctor. Too much salt can cause your blood pressure to increase beyond a healthy level, creating new health risks.	Eat small meals. If your blood pressure drops after eating, your doctor may recommend small, low-carbohydrate meals.	Get plenty of fluids. Keeping hydrated helps prevent symptoms of low blood pressure. But avoid or limit the amount of alcohol you drink, because alcohol can worsen orthostatic hypotension.	Exercise. Exercise your calf muscles before sitting up. Also, when getting out of bed, sit on the edge of your bed for a minute before standing. Exercise regularly may help reduce symptoms of orthostatic hypotension.	Avoid bending at the waist. If you drop something on the floor, squat with your knees to recover it.	Wear compression stockings or abdominal binders. These may help reduce the symptoms of orthostatic hypotension.	Get up slowly. You may be able to reduce the dizziness and lightheadedness that occur with orthostatic hypotension by taking it easy when you move from a lying to standing position. Instead of jumping out of bed in the morning, breathe deeply for a few minutes and then slowly sit up before standing.	Elevate your head in bed. Sleeping with the head of your bed slightly elevated can help fight the effects of gravity.	Move your legs while standing. If you begin to get symptoms while standing, cross your thighs in a scissors fashion and squeeze, or put one foot on a ledge or chair and lean as far forward as possible. These maneuvers encourage blood to flow from your legs to your heart.	
Osgood-Schlatter disease||Rest the joint. Limit the time spent doing activities that aggravate the condition, such as kneeling, jumping and running.	Ice the affected area. This can help with pain and swelling.	Stretch leg muscles. Stretching the quadriceps, the muscles on the front of the thigh, is especially important.	Protect the knee. When your child is participating in sports, have him or her wear a pad over the affected knee at the point where the knee may become irritated.	Try a strap. A patellar tendon strap fits around the leg just below the kneecap. It can help to "tack down" the kneecap's tendon during activities and distribute some of the force away from the shinbone.	Cross-train. Suggest that your child switch to activities that don't involve jumping or running, such as cycling or swimming, until symptoms subside.	
Osteoarthritis|Pain. Your joint may hurt during or after movement.	Tenderness. Your joint may feel tender when you apply light pressure to it.	Stiffness. Joint stiffness may be most noticeable when you wake up in the morning or after a period of inactivity.	Loss of flexibility. You may not be able to move your joint through its full range of motion.	Grating sensation. You may hear or feel a grating sensation when you use the joint.	Bone spurs. These extra bits of bone, which feel like hard lumps, may form around the affected joint.	|Exercise. Exercise can increase your endurance and strengthen the muscles around your joint, making your joint more stable. Try walking, biking or swimming. If you feel new joint pain, stop. New pain that lasts for hours after you exercise probably means you've overdone it but doesn't mean you should stop exercising altogether.	Lose weight. Being overweight or obese increases the stress on your weight-bearing joints, such as your knees and your hips. Even a small amount of weight loss can relieve some pressure and reduce your pain. Talk to your doctor about healthy ways to lose weight. Most people combine changes in their diet with increased exercise.	Use heat and cold to manage pain. Both heat and cold can relieve pain in your joint. Heat also relieves stiffness, and cold can relieve muscle spasms and pain.	Apply over-the-counter pain creams. Creams and gels available at drugstores may provide temporary relief from osteoarthritis pain. Some creams numb the pain by creating a hot or cool sensation. Other creams contain medications, such as aspirin-like compounds, that are absorbed into your skin. Pain creams work best on joints that are close to the surface of your skin, such as your knees and fingers.	Use assistive devices. Assistive devices can make it easier to go about your day without stressing your painful joint. A cane may take weight off your knee or hip as you walk. Carry the cane in the hand opposite the leg that hurts. Gripping and grabbing tools may make it easier to work in the kitchen if you have osteoarthritis in your fingers. Your doctor or occupational therapist may have ideas about what sorts of assistive devices may be helpful to you. Catalogs and medical supply stores also may be places to look for ideas.	
Osteochondritis dissecans|Pain. This most common symptom of osteochondritis dissecans might be triggered by physical activity — walking up stairs, climbing a hill or playing sports.	Swelling and tenderness. The skin around your joint might be swollen and tender.	Joint popping or locking. Your joint might pop or stick in one position if a loose fragment gets caught between bones during movement.	Joint weakness. You might feel as though your joint is "giving way" or weakening.	Decreased range of motion. You might be unable to straighten the affected limb completely.	|
Osteomyelitis|Fever or chills	Irritability or lethargy in young children	Pain in the area of the infection	Swelling, warmth and redness over the area of the infection	|
Osteoporosis|Back pain, caused by a fractured or collapsed vertebra	Loss of height over time	A stooped posture	A bone fracture that occurs much more easily than expected	|Don't smoke. Smoking increases rates of bone loss and the chance of experiencing a fracture.	Avoid excessive alcohol. Consuming more than two alcoholic drinks a day may decrease bone formation. Being under the influence also can increase your risk of falling.	Prevent falls. Wear low-heeled shoes with nonslip soles and check your house for electrical cords, area rugs and slippery surfaces that might cause you to trip or fall. Keep rooms brightly lit, install grab bars just inside and outside your shower door, and make sure you can get into and out of your bed easily.	
Ovarian cancer|Abdominal bloating or swelling	Quickly feeling full when eating	Weight loss	Discomfort in the pelvis area	Changes in bowel habits, such as constipation	A frequent need to urinate	|
Ovarian cysts|Pelvic pain — a dull ache that may radiate to your lower back and thighs	Pelvic pain shortly before your period begins or just before it ends	Pelvic pain during intercourse (dyspareunia)	Pain during bowel movements or pressure on your bowels	Nausea, vomiting or breast tenderness like that experienced during pregnancy	Fullness or heaviness in your abdomen	Pressure on your bladder that causes you to urinate more frequently or have difficulty emptying your bladder completely	|
Overactive bladder|Feel a sudden urge to urinate that's difficult to control	Experience urge incontinence — the involuntary loss of urine immediately following an urgent need to urinate	Urinate frequently, usually eight or more times in 24 hours	Awaken two or more times in the night to urinate (nocturia)	|Maintain a healthy weight. If you're overweight, losing weight may ease your symptoms. Heavier people are also at greater risk of stress urinary incontinence, which may improve with weight loss.	Follow a fluid schedule. Ask your doctor how much fluid you need daily. People who are safely able to reduce their fluid intake by about 25 percent may experience a decrease in overactive bladder symptoms.	Avoid caffeine and alcohol. If caffeinated and alcoholic beverages worsen your symptoms, it might be wise to avoid them.	
Paget's disease of the breast|Flaky or scaly skin on your nipple 	Crusty, oozing or hardened skin resembling eczema on the nipple, areola or both 	Itching 	Redness 	A tingling or burning sensation 	Straw-colored or bloody nipple discharge 	A flattened or turned-in (inverted) nipple 	A lump in the breast 	Thickening skin on the breast 	|
Painful intercourse (dyspareunia)|Pain only at sexual penetration (entry)	Pain with every penetration, even while putting in a tampon	New pain after previously pain-free intercourse	Deep pain during thrusting	Burning pain or aching pain	Throbbing pain, lasting hours after intercourse	|Switch positions. If you experience sharp pain during thrusting, the penis may be striking your cervix or stressing the pelvic floor muscles, causing aching or cramping pain. Changing positions may help. You can try being on top of your partner during sex. Women usually have more control in this position, so you may be able to regulate penetration to a depth that feels good to you.	Communicate. Talk about what feels good and what doesn't. If you need your partner to go slow, say so.	Don't rush. Longer foreplay can help stimulate your natural lubrication. And you may reduce pain by delaying penetration until you feel fully aroused.	Use lubricants. A personal lubricant can make sex more comfortable. Try different brands until you find one you like.	
Progressive supranuclear palsy|A loss of balance while walking. A tendency to fall backward can occur very early in the disease.	An inability to aim your eyes properly. You may have particular difficulty looking downward, or experience blurring and doubled vision. This difficulty with focusing the eyes can make some people spill food or appear disinterested in conversation because of poor eye contact.	|Use eyedrops to help ease dry eyes that can occur as a result of problems with blinking or persistent tearing.	Install grab bars in hallways and bathrooms, to help you avoid falls.	Use a walker that is weighted, to help you avoid falls.	Remove scatter rugs or other items that are hard to see without looking downward.	Avoid climbing stairs.	
Pancreatic cancer|Upper abdominal pain that may radiate to your back 	Yellowing of your skin and the whites of your eyes (jaundice) 	Loss of appetite 	Weight loss 	Depression 	Blood clots 	|
Pancreatic cysts|Persistent abdominal pain, which may radiate to your back	A mass you can feel in your upper abdomen	Nausea and vomiting	|
Pancreatitis|Upper abdominal pain	Abdominal pain that radiates to your back	Abdominal pain that feels worse after eating	Nausea	Vomiting	Tenderness when touching the abdomen	|Stop drinking alcohol. If you're unable to stop drinking alcohol on your own, ask your doctor for help. Your doctor can refer you to local programs to help you stop drinking.	Stop smoking. If you smoke, quit. If you don't smoke, don't start. If you can't quit on your own, ask your doctor for help. Medications and counseling can help you stop smoking.	Choose a low-fat diet. Choose a diet that limits fat and emphasizes fresh fruits and vegetables, whole grains, and lean protein.	Drink more fluids. Pancreatitis can cause dehydration, so drink more fluids throughout the day. It may help to keep a water bottle or glass of water with you.	
Panic attacks and panic disorder|Sense of impending doom or danger	Fear of loss of control or death	Rapid, pounding heart rate	Sweating	Trembling or shaking	Shortness of breath or tightness in your throat	Chills	Hot flashes	Nausea	Abdominal cramping	Chest pain	Headache	Dizziness, lightheadedness or faintness	Numbness or tingling sensation	Feeling of unreality or detachment	|Stick to your treatment plan. Facing your fears can be difficult, but treatment can help you feel like you're not a hostage in your own home.	Join a support group. Joining a group for people with panic attacks or anxiety disorders can connect you with others facing the same problems.	Avoid caffeine, alcohol, smoking and recreational drugs. All of these can trigger or worsen panic attacks.	Practice stress management and relaxation techniques. For example, yoga, deep breathing and progressive muscle relaxation — tensing one muscle at a time, and then completely releasing the tension until every muscle in the body is relaxed — also may be helpful.	Get physically active. Aerobic activity may have a calming effect on your mood.	Get sufficient sleep. Get enough sleep so that you don't feel drowsy during the day.	
Paraneoplastic syndromes of the nervous system|Difficulty walking 	Difficulty maintaining balance 	Loss of muscle coordination 	Loss of muscle tone or weakness 	Loss of fine motor skills, such as picking up objects 	Difficulty swallowing 	Slurred speech 	Memory loss and other thinking (cognitive) impairment 	Vision problems 	Sleep disturbances 	Seizures 	Sensory disturbances 	Unusual involuntary movements 	|
Personality disorders|Pervasive distrust and suspicion of others and their motives	Unjustified belief that others are trying to harm or deceive you	Unjustified suspicion of the loyalty or trustworthiness of others	Hesitant to confide in others due to unreasonable fear that others will use the information against you	Perception of innocent remarks or nonthreatening situations as personal insults or attacks	Angry or hostile reaction to perceived slights or insults	Tendency to hold grudges	Unjustified, recurrent suspicion that spouse or sexual partner is unfaithful	|Be an active participant in your care. This can help your efforts to manage your personality disorder. Don't skip therapy sessions, even if you don't feel like going. Think about your goals for treatment and work toward achieving them.	Take your medications as directed. Even if you're feeling well, don't skip your medications. If you stop, symptoms may come back. You could also experience withdrawal-like symptoms from stopping a medication too suddenly.	Learn about your condition. Education about your condition can empower you and motivate you to stick to your treatment plan.	Get active. Physical activity and exercise can help manage many symptoms, such as depression, stress and anxiety. Activity can also counteract the effects of some psychiatric medications that may cause weight gain. Consider walking, jogging, swimming, gardening or taking up another form of physical activity that you enjoy.	Avoid drugs and alcohol. Alcohol and illegal drugs can worsen personality disorder symptoms or interact with medications.	Get routine medical care. Don't neglect checkups or skip visits to your family doctor, especially if you aren't feeling well. You may have a new health problem that needs to be addressed, or you may be experiencing side effects of medication.	
Parkinson's disease|Tremor. A tremor, or shaking, usually begins in a limb, often your hand or fingers. You may notice a back-and-forth rubbing of your thumb and forefinger, known as a pill-rolling tremor. One characteristic of Parkinson's disease is a tremor of your hand when it is relaxed (at rest).	Slowed movement (bradykinesia). Over time, Parkinson's disease may reduce your ability to move and slow your movement, making simple tasks difficult and time-consuming. Your steps may become shorter when you walk, or you may find it difficult to get out of a chair. Also, you may drag your feet as you try to walk, making it difficult to move.	Rigid muscles. Muscle stiffness may occur in any part of your body. The stiff muscles can limit your range of motion and cause you pain.	Impaired posture and balance. Your posture may become stooped, or you may have balance problems as a result of Parkinson's disease.	Loss of automatic movements. In Parkinson's disease, you may have a decreased ability to perform unconscious movements, including blinking, smiling or swinging your arms when you walk.	Speech changes. You may have speech problems as a result of Parkinson's disease. You may speak softly, quickly, slur or hesitate before talking. Your speech may be more of a monotone rather than with the usual inflections.	Writing changes. It may become hard to write, and your writing may appear small.	|Try not to move too quickly.	Aim for your heel to strike the floor first when you're walking.	If you notice yourself shuffling, stop and check your posture. It's best to stand up straight.	Look in front of you, not directly down, while walking.	
Parvovirus infection|Fever	Upset stomach	Headache	Runny nose	|Treatments and drugs	Prevention	
Patellar tendinitis|At first be present only as you begin physical activity or just after an intense workout	Worsen until it interferes with playing your sport	Eventually interfere with daily movements such as climbing stairs or rising from a chair	|Pain relievers. Over-the-counter medications such as ibuprofen and naproxen sodium may provide short-term pain relief.	Avoid activity that causes pain. You may need to practice your sport less often or temporarily switch to a lower impact sport. Working through pain can further damage your patellar tendon.	Ice. Apply ice after activity that causes pain. Place ice in a plastic bag and wrap the bag in a towel. Or try an ice massage. Freeze water in a plastic foam cup and hold the cup as you apply the ice directly to your skin.	
Patent ductus arteriosus (PDA)|Poor eating, which leads to poor growth	Sweating with crying or eating	Persistent fast breathing or breathlessness	Easy tiring	Rapid heart rate	|Preventing infection. For most people who have a patent ductus arteriosus, regularly brushing and flossing teeth and regular dental checkups are the best ways to help prevent infection.	Exercising and play. Parents of children who have congenital heart defects often worry about the risks of rough play and vigorous activity, even after successful treatment. Although some children might need to limit the amount or type of exercise, most people who have patent ductus arteriosus will lead normal lives. Your child's doctor can advise you about which activities are safe for your child.	
Patent foramen ovale||Treatments and drugs	
Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS)|Irregular periods. This is the most common characteristic. Examples include menstrual intervals longer than 35 days; fewer than eight menstrual cycles a year; failure to menstruate for four months or longer; and prolonged periods that may be scant or heavy.	Excess androgen. Elevated levels of male hormones (androgens) may result in physical signs, such as excess facial and body hair (hirsutism), adult acne or severe adolescent acne, and male-pattern baldness (androgenic alopecia).	Polycystic ovaries. Polycystic ovaries become enlarged and contain numerous small fluid-filled sacs which surround the eggs.	|Keep your weight in check. Obesity makes insulin resistance worse. Weight loss can reduce both insulin and androgen levels and may restore ovulation. No single specific dietary approach is best, but losing weight by reducing how many calories you consume each day may help with polycystic ovary syndrome, especially if you're overweight or obese. Use smaller plates, reduce portion sizes and resist the urge for seconds to help with weight loss. Ask your doctor to recommend a weight-control program, and meet regularly with a dietitian for help in reaching weight-loss goals.	Consider dietary changes. Low-fat, high-carbohydrate diets may increase insulin levels, so you may want to consider a low-carbohydrate diet if you have PCOS — and if your doctor recommends it. Don't severely restrict carbohydrates; instead, choose complex carbohydrates, which are high in fiber. The more fiber in a food, the more slowly it's digested and the more slowly your blood sugar levels rise. High-fiber carbohydrates include whole-grain breads and cereals, whole-wheat pasta, bulgur wheat, barley, brown rice, and beans. Limit less healthy, simple carbohydrates such as soda, excess fruit juice, cake, candy, ice cream, pies, cookies and doughnuts.	Be active. Exercise helps lower blood sugar levels. If you have PCOS, increasing your daily activity and participating in a regular exercise program may treat or even prevent insulin resistance and help you keep your weight under control.	
Peanut allergy|Runny nose	Skin reactions, such as hives, redness or swelling	Itching or tingling in or around the mouth and throat	Digestive problems, such as diarrhea, stomach cramps, nausea or vomiting	Tightening of the throat	Shortness of breath or wheezing	| Never assume a food doesn't contain peanuts. Peanuts may be in foods that you had no idea contained them. Always read labels on manufactured foods to make sure they don't contain peanuts or peanut products. Manufactured foods are required to clearly state whether foods contain any peanuts and if they were produced in factories that also process peanuts. Even if you think you know what's in a food, check the label. Ingredients may change. 	Don't ignore a label that says a food was produced in a factory that processes peanuts. Most people with a peanut allergy need to avoid all products that could contain even trace amounts of peanuts.	When in doubt, say "no thanks." At restaurants and social gatherings, you're always taking a risk that you might accidentally eat peanuts. Many people don't understand the seriousness of an allergic food reaction, and may not realize that a tiny amount of a food can cause a severe reaction. If you are at all worried that a food may contain something you're allergic to, don't try it.	Be prepared for a reaction. Talk with your doctor about carrying emergency medications in case of severe reaction.	
Pectus excavatum|Decreased exercise tolerance	Rapid heartbeat or heart palpitations	Recurrent respiratory infections	Wheezing or coughing	Chest pain	Heart murmur	Fatigue	|
Pediatric white blood cell disorders|Low white blood cell count (leukopenia) means having too few leukocytes circulating in the blood. A long-term low white blood cell count increases the risk of infections and may be caused by a number of different diseases and conditions.	High white blood cell count (leukocytosis) means having too many leukocytes circulating in the blood, usually from having an infection. A number of different diseases and conditions may cause a long-term high white blood cell count.	|Low white blood cell count (leukopenia) means having too few leukocytes circulating in the blood. A long-term low white blood cell count increases the risk of infections and may be caused by a number of different diseases and conditions.	High white blood cell count (leukocytosis) means having too many leukocytes circulating in the blood, usually from having an infection. A number of different diseases and conditions may cause a long-term high white blood cell count.	
Pelvic inflammatory disease (PID)|Pain in your lower abdomen and pelvis	Heavy vaginal discharge with an unpleasant odor	Irregular menstrual bleeding	Pain during intercourse	Fever	Painful or difficult urination	|
Penicillin allergy|Skin rash	Hives	Itching	Fever	Swelling	Shortness of breath	Wheezing	Runny nose	Itchy, watery eyes	Anaphylaxis	|
Peptic ulcer|Be felt anywhere from your navel up to your breastbone	Be worse when your stomach is empty	Flare at night	Often be temporarily relieved by eating certain foods that buffer stomach acid or by taking an acid-reducing medication	Disappear and then return for a few days or weeks	|Choose a healthy diet. Choose a healthy diet full of fruits, vegetables and whole grains. Not eating vitamin-rich foods may make it difficult for your body to heal your ulcer.	Consider switching pain relievers. If you use pain relievers regularly, ask your doctor whether acetaminophen (Tylenol, others) may be an option for you.	Control stress. Stress may worsen the signs and symptoms of a peptic ulcer. Examine your life to determine the sources of your stress and do what you can to address those causes. Some stress is unavoidable, but you can learn to cope with stress with exercise, spending time with friends or writing in a journal.	Don't smoke. Smoking may interfere with the protective lining of the stomach, making your stomach more susceptible to the development of an ulcer. Smoking also increases stomach acid.	Limit or avoid alcohol. Excessive use of alcohol can irritate and erode the mucous lining in your stomach and intestines, causing inflammation and bleeding.	
Pericardial effusion|Shortness of breath or difficulty breathing (dyspnea)	Discomfort when breathing while lying down (orthopnea)	Chest pain, usually behind the breastbone or on the left side of the chest that often feels worse when you breathe and feels better when you are sitting up, rather than lying down	Cough	Low-grade fever	Rapid heart rate	|
Pericarditis|Sharp, piercing chest pain over the center or left side of the chest	Shortness of breath when reclining	Heart palpitations	Low-grade fever	An overall sense of weakness, fatigue or feeling sick	Cough	Abdominal or leg swelling	|Treatments and drugs	
Perimenopause|Menstrual irregularity. As ovulation becomes more unpredictable, the length of time between periods may be longer or shorter, your flow may be light to heavy, and you may skip some periods. If you have a persistent change of seven days or more in the length of your menstrual cycle, you may be in early perimenopause. If you have a space of 60 days or more between periods, you're likely in late perimenopause. 	Hot flashes and sleep problems. Many women experience hot flashes during perimenopause. The intensity, length and frequency vary. Sleep problems are often due to hot flashes or night sweats, but sometimes sleep becomes unpredictable even without them. 	Mood changes. Some women experience mood swings, irritability or increased risk of depression during perimenopause, but the cause of these symptoms may be sleep disruption caused by hot flashes. Mood changes may also be caused by factors not related to the hormonal changes of perimenopause. 	Vaginal and bladder problems. When estrogen levels diminish, your vaginal tissues may lose lubrication and elasticity, making intercourse painful. Low estrogen levels may also leave you more vulnerable to urinary or vaginal infections. Loss of tissue tone may contribute to urinary incontinence. 	Decreasing fertility. As ovulation becomes irregular, your ability to conceive decreases. However, as long as you're having periods, pregnancy is still possible. If you wish to avoid pregnancy, use birth control until you've had no periods for 12 months. 	Changes in sexual function. During perimenopause, sexual arousal and desire may change. But for most women who had satisfactory sexual intimacy before menopause, this will likely continue through perimenopause and beyond. 	Loss of bone. With declining estrogen levels, you start to lose bone more quickly than you replace it, increasing your risk of osteoporosis — a disease that causes fragile bones. 	Changing cholesterol levels. Declining estrogen levels may lead to unfavorable changes in your blood cholesterol levels, including an increase in low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol — the "bad" cholesterol — which contributes to an increased risk of heart disease. At the same time, high-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol — the "good" cholesterol — decreases in many women as they age, which also increases the risk of heart disease. 	|Decrease vaginal discomfort. Use over-the-counter, water-based vaginal lubricants (Astroglide, K-Y Intrigue, others) or moisturizers (Replens, Vagisil Daily Feminine Moisturizer, others). Choose products that don't contain glycerin, which can cause burning or irritation in women who are sensitive to that chemical. Staying sexually active also helps by increasing blood flow to the vagina. 	Eat healthy. Because your risk of osteoporosis and heart disease increases at this time, a healthy diet is more important than ever. Adopt a low-fat, high-fiber diet that's rich in fruits, vegetables and whole grains. Add calcium-rich foods. Ask your doctor if you should also take a calcium supplement and if so, what type and how much — also ask if you need more Vitamin D, which helps your body absorb calcium. Avoid alcohol and caffeine if they seem to trigger hot flashes. 	Get regular physical activity. Regular exercise and physical activity helps prevent weight gain, improves your sleep and elevates your mood. Try to exercise for 30 minutes or more on most days of the week, although not right before bedtime. Regular exercise has been shown to reduce hip fracture risk in older women and to strengthen bone density. 	Get enough sleep. Try to keep a consistent sleep schedule. Avoid caffeine, which can make it hard to get to sleep, and avoid drinking too much alcohol, which can interrupt sleep. 	Practice stress reduction techniques. Practiced regularly, stress-reduction techniques, such as meditation or yoga, can promote relaxation and good health throughout your lifetime, but they may be particularly helpful during the menopausal transition. 	
Periodontitis|Swollen gums	Bright red or purplish gums	Gums that feel tender when touched	Gums that pull away from your teeth (recede), making your teeth look longer than normal	New spaces developing between your teeth	Pus between your teeth and gums	Bad breath	Bad taste in your mouth	Loose teeth	A change in the way your teeth fit together when you bite	|Get regular professional dental cleanings, on a schedule recommended by your dentist.	Use a soft toothbrush and replace it at least every three to four months.	Consider using an electric toothbrush, which may be more effective at removing plaque and tartar.	Brush your teeth twice a day or, better yet, after every meal or snack.	Floss daily.	Use a mouth rinse to help reduce plaque between your teeth.	Supplement brushing and flossing with an interdental cleaner, such as a dental pick, interdental brush or dental stick specially designed to clean between your teeth.	
Peripheral neuropathy|Sensory nerves that receive sensation from the skin such as temperature, pain, vibration or touch	Motor nerves that control how your muscles move	Autonomic nerves that control functions such as blood pressure, heart rate, digestion and bladder	|Take care of your feet, especially if you have diabetes. Check daily for blisters, cuts or calluses. Wear soft, loose cotton socks and padded shoes. You can use a semicircular hoop, which is available in medical supply stores, to keep bedcovers off hot or sensitive feet.	Exercise. Ask your doctor about an exercise routine. Regular exercise, such as walking three times a week, may reduce neuropathy pain, improve your muscle strength and help control blood sugar levels. Gentle routines such as yoga and tai chi might also help.	Quit smoking. Cigarette smoking can affect circulation, increasing the risk of foot problems and other neuropathy complications.	Eat healthy meals. Healthy eating is especially important to ensure that you get essential vitamins and minerals. Emphasize low-fat meats and dairy products and include lots of fruits, vegetables and whole grains in your diet.	Avoid excessive alcohol. Alcohol may worsen peripheral neuropathy.	Monitor your blood glucose levels. If you have diabetes, monitoring your blood glucose levels will help keep your blood glucose under control and may help improve your neuropathy.	
Peritonitis|Abdominal pain or tenderness	Bloating or a feeling of fullness (distention) in your abdomen	Fever	Nausea and vomiting	Loss of appetite	Diarrhea	Low urine output	Thirst	Inability to pass stool or gas	Fatigue	|
Pet allergy|Sneezing 	Runny nose 	Itchy, red or watery eyes 	Nasal congestion 	Itchy nose, roof of mouth or throat 	Postnasal drip 	Cough 	Facial pressure and pain 	Frequent awakening 	Swollen, blue-colored skin under your eyes 	In a child, frequent upward rubbing of the nose 	|Clean. Have someone without pet allergies clean the entire house, including a thorough washing of the ceilings and walls. 	Replace or move upholstered furniture. Replace upholstered furniture if possible, as cleaning won't remove all pet allergens from upholstery. Move upholstered furniture from your bedroom into another area of your home. 	Replace carpets. If possible, replace carpeting, particularly in your bedroom. 	Replace bedding. Replace sheets, blankets and other bedcovers, because it's difficult to wash away pet allergens completely. Replace bed pillows. If you can't replace your mattress and box spring, encase them in allergen-blocking covers. 	Use high-efficiency filters. High-efficiency particulate air (HEPA) filters for your air ducts may trap allergens in the air, and HEPA vacuum bags may reduce the amount of dander rustled up by your cleaning. HEPA air purifiers may also reduce airborne pet allergens. 	
Peyronie's disease|Scar tissue. The scar tissue (plaques) associated with Peyronie's disease can be felt under the skin of the penis as flat lumps or a band of hard tissue.	A significant bend to the penis. Your penis might be curved upward, downward or bent to one side. In some cases, the erect penis might have narrowing, indentations or an hourglass appearance, with a tight, narrow band around the shaft.	Erection problems. Peyronie's disease might cause problems getting or maintaining an erection (erectile dysfunction).	Shortening of the penis. Your penis might become shorter as a result of Peyronie's disease.	Pain. You might have penile pain, with or without an erection.	|
Phantom pain|Onset within the first few days of amputation	Comes and goes or is continuous	Often affects the part of the limb farthest from the body, such as the foot of an amputated leg	May be described as shooting, stabbing, boring, squeezing, throbbing or burning	Sometimes feels as if the phantom part is forced into an uncomfortable position	 May be triggered by pressure on the remaining part of the limb or emotional stress	|Look for distractions. Find activities that take your focus off the pain, such as reading or listening to music.	Stay physically active. Get your exercise by doing activities that you enjoy, such as gardening, walking, swimming or cycling.	Take your medications. Follow your doctor's directions in taking prescribed and over-the-counter pain medications. If you try herbal and other alternative medications, be sure to tell your doctor.	Find ways to relax. Practice activities that reduce your emotional and muscular tension. Take a warm bath — not too hot, as heat may aggravate the pain. Lie down and follow helpful relaxation techniques, such as rhythmic breathing, meditation or visualization.	Seek the support of other people. Find ways to get closer to others. Call friends, or join a support group or a group involved in your favorite hobby.	Take care of your stump. Removing or putting on your prosthesis, massaging the stump, and applying TENS, cold or heat may reduce the pain.	
Phenylketonuria|Intellectual disability (formerly called mental retardation)	Delayed development	Behavioral, emotional and social problems	Psychiatric disorders	Neurological problems that may include seizures	Hyperactivity	Poor bone strength	Skin rashes (eczema)	A musty odor in the child's breath, skin or urine, caused by too much phenylalanine in the body	Fair skin and blue eyes, because phenylalanine cannot transform into melanin — the pigment responsible for hair and skin tone	Abnormally small head (microcephaly)	|Treatments and drugs	Coping and support	
Pheochromocytoma|High blood pressure	Rapid or forceful heartbeat	Profound sweating	Severe headache	Tremors	Paleness in the face	Shortness of breath	|
Phobias|Specific phobias. A specific phobia involves an irrational, persistent fear of a specific object or situation that's out of proportion to the actual risk. This includes a fear of situations (such as airplanes or enclosed spaces); nature (such as thunderstorms or heights); animals or insects (such as dogs or spiders); blood, injection or injury (such as knives or medical procedures); or other phobias (such as loud noises or clowns). There are many other types of specific phobias. It's not unusual to experience phobias about more than one object or situation.	Social phobia. More than just shyness, social phobia involves a combination of excessive self-consciousness and a fear of public scrutiny or humiliation in common social situations. In social situations, the person fears being rejected or negatively evaluated or fears offending others.	Fear of open spaces (agoraphobia). This is a fear of an actual or anticipated situation, such as using public transportation, being in open or enclosed spaces, standing in line or being in a crowd, or being outside the home alone. The anxiety is caused by fearing no easy means of escape or help if intense anxiety develops. Most people who have agoraphobia develop it after having one or more panic attacks, causing them to fear another attack and avoid the place where it occurred. For some people, agoraphobia may be so severe that they're unable to leave home.	|
Polymorphous light eruption|Dense clusters of small bumps	Raised rough patches	Redness	Itching or burning	Blistering and swelling (less common)	|Using cold compresses. Apply a towel dampened with cool tap water to the affected skin, or take a cool bath.	Leaving blisters alone. To speed healing and avoid infection, leave blisters intact. If needed, you can lightly cover blisters with gauze.	
Pilonidal cyst|Pain	Reddening of the skin	Drainage of pus or blood from an opening in the skin	Foul smell from draining pus	|
Pinched nerve|Numbness or decreased sensation in the area supplied by the nerve	Sharp, aching or burning pain, which may radiate outward	Tingling, "pins and needles" sensations (paresthesia)	Muscle weakness in the affected area	Frequent feeling that a foot or hand has "fallen asleep"	|
Pink eye (conjunctivitis)|Redness	Itchiness	A gritty feeling	A discharge that forms a crust during the night that may prevent your eye or eyes from opening in the morning	Tearing	| Apply a compress to your eyes. To make a compress, soak a clean, lint-free cloth in water and wring it out. Then apply it gently to your closed eyelids for a few minutes several times a day. Generally, a cool water compress will feel the most soothing. But you can also use a warm compress if that feels better to you. If pink eye affects only one eye, don't touch both eyes with the same cloth. This reduces the risk of spreading an infection from one eye to the other. 	 Use eyedrops. Over-the-counter eyedrops called artificial tears may relieve symptoms. Some eyedrops contain antihistamines or other medications that can be helpful for people with allergic conjunctivitis. Avoid eyedrops for red eye (Visine, Clear Eyes) because they tend to work for a while then cause rebound redness. 	 Stop wearing contact lenses. If you wear contact lenses, stop wearing them until your eyes feel better. How long you'll need to go without contact lenses depends on what's causing your conjunctivitis. Ask your doctor whether you should throw away your disposable contacts, cleaning solution or lens case. If your lenses aren't disposable, clean them thoroughly before using them again. 	Avoid whatever causes your symptoms. This tip may be helpful if you have allergic conjunctivitis.	Wash your clothes frequently. This tip may be helpful if you have allergic conjunctivitis.	Bathe or shower before bedtime. This tip may be helpful if you have allergic conjunctivitis.	
Pinworm infection|Itching of the anal or vaginal area	Insomnia, irritability and restlessness	Intermittent abdominal pain and nausea	|
Pityriasis rosea||Take over-the-counter allergy medicine (antihistamines). These include diphenhydramine (Benadryl, others).	Bathe or shower in lukewarm water.	Take an oatmeal bath. You can find oatmeal bath products at your pharmacy.	Apply a moisturizer, calamine lotion or an over-the-counter corticosteroid cream.	
Polycystic kidney disease|High blood pressure	Back or side pain	Headache	Increase in the size of your abdomen	Blood in your urine	Frequent urination	Kidney stones	Kidney failure	Urinary tract or kidney infections	|
Placental abruption|Vaginal bleeding	Abdominal pain	Back pain	Uterine tenderness	Rapid uterine contractions, often coming one right after another	|
Plague|Situated in the groin, armpit or neck 	About the size of a chicken egg 	Tender and warm to the touch 	|
Plantar fasciitis||Maintain a healthy weight. This minimizes the stress on your plantar fascia.	Choose supportive shoes. Avoid high heels. Buy shoes with a low to moderate heel, good arch support and shock absorbency. Don't go barefoot, especially on hard surfaces.	Don't wear worn-out athletic shoes. Replace your old athletic shoes before they stop supporting and cushioning your feet. If you're a runner, buy new shoes after about 500 miles of use.	Change your sport. Try a low-impact sport, such as swimming or bicycling, instead of walking or jogging.	Apply ice. Hold a cloth-covered ice pack over the area of pain for 15 to 20 minutes three or four times a day or after activity. Or try ice massage. Freeze a water-filled paper cup and roll it over the site of discomfort for about five to seven minutes. Regular ice massage can help reduce pain and inflammation.	Stretch your arches. Simple home exercises can stretch your plantar fascia, Achilles tendon and calf muscles.	
Plantar warts|A small, fleshy, rough, grainy growth (lesion) on the bottom of your foot	Hard, thickened skin (callus) over a well-defined "spot" on the skin, where a wart has grown inward	Black pinpoints, which are commonly called wart seeds but are actually small, clotted blood vessels	A lesion that interrupts the normal lines and ridges in the skin of your foot	Pain or tenderness when walking or standing	|Peeling medicine (salicylic acid). Nonprescription wart removal products are available as a patch or liquid. Usually, you're instructed to wash the site, soak it for up to 20 minutes, gently remove dead tissue with a pumice stone or emery board, and apply the solution or patch. Patches are usually changed every 48 hours. Liquid applications are generally used twice a day. You may not see results for several weeks.	Freezing medicine (cryotherapy). Nonprescription medicines that freeze the wart include Compound W Freeze Off or Dr. Scholl's Freeze Away. The Food and Drug Administration cautions that some wart removers are flammable and shouldn't be used around fire, flame, heat sources (such as curling irons) and lit cigarettes.	 Duct tape. You use this by covering the wart with silver duct tape for six days, soaking the wart in water, gently removing dead tissue with a pumice stone or emery board, and then leaving the wart exposed for about 12 hours. You repeat the process until the wart is gone. Study results have been mixed on the effectiveness of duct tape in removing warts, either alone or with other therapies. 	
Pleurisy|Chest pain that worsens when you breathe, cough or sneeze	Shortness of breath — because you are trying to minimize breathing in and out	A cough — only in some cases	A fever — only in some cases	|Take medication. Take medication such as ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin IB, others) as needed to relieve pain and inflammation.	Get plenty of rest. Find the position that causes you the least discomfort and try to stay in it. Even when you start to feel better, be careful not to overdo it.	
Primary lateral sclerosis (PLS)|Stiffness, weakness and spasticity in your legs	Tripping, difficulty with balance and clumsiness as the leg muscles weaken	Weakness and stiffness progressing to your trunk, then your arms, hands, tongue and jaw	Hoarseness, reduced rate of speaking, slurred speech and drooling as the facial muscles weaken	Difficulties with swallowing and breathing late in the disease	| Stay active. Continue activity or exercise programs as long as you can comfortably and safely do so. Staying active may help you keep your existing function and slow the progression of the disease. Be sure you stay safe, keeping in mind that your muscle weakness puts you at higher risk of tripping and falling. 	Eat a healthy diet. Because PLS can cause your activity level to slow down, be sure you're eating a nutritious diet to avoid excessive weight gain and added pressure on your joints.	
Pneumonia|Fever, sweating and shaking chills	Cough, which may produce phlegm	Chest pain when you breathe or cough	Shortness of breath	Fatigue	Nausea, vomiting or diarrhea	|Get plenty of rest. Don't go back to school or work until after your temperature returns to normal and you stop coughing up mucus. Even when you start to feel better, be careful not to overdo it. Because pneumonia can recur, it's better not to jump back into your routine until you are fully recovered. Ask your doctor if you're not sure.	Stay hydrated. Drink plenty of fluids, especially water, to help loosen mucus in your lungs.	Take your medicine as prescribed. Take the entire course of any medications your doctor prescribed for you. If you stop medication too soon, your lungs may continue to harbor bacteria that can multiply and cause your pneumonia to recur.	
Pneumonitis|Shortness of breath	Cough	Fatigue	Loss of appetite	Unintentional weight loss	|Treatments and drugs	
POEMS Syndrome|Polyneuropathy. Numbness, tingling and weakness in your legs — and over time, maybe in your hands — and difficulty breathing.	Organomegaly. Enlarged spleen, liver or lymph nodes.	Endocrinopathy. Abnormal hormone levels that can result in underactive thyroid (hypothyroidism), diabetes, sexual problems, fatigue, swelling in your limbs, and problems with metabolism and other essential functions.	Monoclonal plasma-proliferative disorder. Abnormal bone marrow cells (plasma cells) that produce a protein (monoclonal protein) that can be found in the bloodstream.	Skin changes. More color than normal on your skin, possibly thicker skin and increased facial or leg hair.	|Polyneuropathy. Numbness, tingling and weakness in your legs — and over time, maybe in your hands — and difficulty breathing.	Organomegaly. Enlarged spleen, liver or lymph nodes.	Endocrinopathy. Abnormal hormone levels that can result in underactive thyroid (hypothyroidism), diabetes, sexual problems, fatigue, swelling in your limbs, and problems with metabolism and other essential functions.	Monoclonal plasma-proliferative disorder. Abnormal bone marrow cells (plasma cells) that produce a protein (monoclonal protein) that can be found in the bloodstream.	Skin changes. More color than normal on your skin, possibly thicker skin and increased facial or leg hair.	
Poison ivy rash|Redness	Itching	Swelling	Blisters	Difficulty breathing, if you've inhaled the smoke from burning poison ivy	|Apply an over-the-counter corticosteroid cream for the first few days.	Apply calamine lotion.	Take oral antihistamines, such as diphenhydramine (Benadryl, others), which may also help you sleep better.	Soak in a cool-water bath containing an oatmeal-based bath product (Aveeno).	Place cool, wet compresses on the affected area for 15 to 30 minutes several times a day.	
Polio|Fever	Sore throat	Headache	Vomiting	Fatigue	Back pain or stiffness	Neck pain or stiffness	Pain or stiffness in the arms or legs	Muscle weakness or tenderness	Meningitis	|
Polycythemia vera|Itchiness, especially following a warm bath or shower	Headache	Dizziness	Weakness	Excessive sweating	Painful swelling of one joint, often the big toe	Shortness of breath	Breathing difficulty when you lie down	Numbness, tingling, burning or weakness in your hands, feet, arms or legs	A feeling of fullness or bloating in your left upper abdomen due to an enlarged spleen	|Exercise. Moderate exercise, such as walking, can improve your blood flow, which decreases your risk of blood clots. Leg and ankle stretches and exercises also can improve your blood circulation.	Avoid tobacco. Using tobacco can cause your blood vessels to narrow, increasing the risk of heart attack or stroke due to blood clots.	Be good to your skin. To reduce itching, bathe in cool water and pat your skin dry. Avoid hot tubs, heated whirlpools, and hot showers or baths. Try not to scratch, as it can damage your skin and increase the risk of infection. Use lotion to keep your skin moist.	Avoid extreme temperatures. Poor blood flow increases your risk of injury from hot and cold temperatures. In cold weather, always wear warm clothing, particularly on your hands and feet. In hot weather, protect yourself from the sun and drink plenty of liquids.	Watch for sores. Poor circulation can make it difficult for sores to heal, particularly on your hands and feet. Inspect your feet regularly and tell your doctor about any sores.	
Polyhydramnios|Shortness of breath or the inability to breathe, except when upright	Swelling in the lower extremities, vulva and abdominal wall	Decreased urine production	|
Polymyalgia rheumatica|Aches or pain in your shoulders (often the first symptom)	Aches or pain in your neck, upper arms, buttocks, hips or thighs	Stiffness in affected areas, particularly in the morning or after being inactive for a long time	Limited range of motion in affected areas	Pain or stiffness in your wrists, elbows or knees (less common)	|Eat a healthy diet. Eat a diet of fruits, vegetables, whole grains, and low-fat meat and dairy products. Limit the salt (sodium) in your diet to prevent fluid buildup and high blood pressure.	Exercise regularly. Talk to your doctor about exercise that is appropriate for you to maintain a healthy weight and to strengthen bones and muscles.	Use assistive devices. Use luggage and grocery carts, reaching aids, shower grab bars and other assistive devices to help make daily tasks easier. Take steps to minimize the risk of falls, such as wearing low-heeled shoes. Talk to your doctor about whether the use of a cane or other walking aid is appropriate for you to prevent falls or other injury.	
Poor color vision|Different shades of red and green	Different shades of blue and yellow	Any colors	|Memorize the order of colored objects. If it's important to know individual colors, such as with traffic lights, memorize the order of the colors.	Label colored items that you want to match with other items. Have someone with good color vision help you sort and label your clothing. Arrange your clothes in your closet or drawers so that colors that can be worn together are near each other.	
Porphyria|Severe abdominal pain	Swelling of the abdomen (abdominal distention)	Pain in your chest, legs or back	Constipation or diarrhea	Vomiting	Insomnia	Heartbeat you can feel (palpitations)	High blood pressure	Anxiety or restlessness	Seizures	Mental changes, such as confusion, hallucinations, disorientation or paranoia	Breathing problems	Muscle pain, tingling, numbness, weakness or paralysis	Red or brown urine	|Learn what could trigger symptoms. Talk to your doctor about the type of porphyria you have and become familiar with possible symptom triggers and ways to avoid them.	Inform your health care providers. Tell all your health care providers that you have porphyria. This is particularly important because sometimes treatments, medications or surgery can trigger porphyria symptoms.	Wear a medical alert bracelet or necklace. Have information about your condition inscribed on a medical alert bracelet or necklace, and always wear it.	
Post-concussion syndrome|Headaches	Dizziness	Fatigue	Irritability	Anxiety	Insomnia	Loss of concentration and memory	Noise and light sensitivity	|
Posterior cruciate ligament injury|Pain. Mild to moderate pain in the knee can cause a slight limp or difficulty walking.	Swelling. Knee swelling occurs rapidly, within hours of the injury.	Instability. Your knee may feel loose, as if it's going to give way.	|Rest. Stay off your injured knee and protect it from further damage. You may need to use crutches.	Ice. Apply ice packs to your knee for 20 to 30 minutes every three to four hours for two to three days.	Compression. Wrap an elastic bandage around your knee.	Elevation. Lie down and place a pillow under your knee to help reduce swelling.	
Posterior prolapse (rectocele)|A soft bulge of tissue in your vagina that may or may not protrude through the vaginal opening	Difficulty having a bowel movement with the need to press your fingers on the bulge in your vagina to help push stool out during a bowel movement ("splinting")	Sensation of rectal pressure or fullness	A feeling that the rectum has not completely emptied after a bowel movement	Sexual concerns, such as feeling embarrassed or sensing looseness in the tone of your vaginal tissue	|Perform Kegel exercises to strengthen pelvic muscles and support the weakened vaginal wall (fascia).	Avoid constipation by eating high-fiber foods and drinking plenty of fluids.	Avoid bearing down to move your bowels. Rely on your natural colorectal function to empty your lower bowel.	Avoid heavy lifting.	Try to control coughing.	Lose weight if you're overweight or obese.	
Postherpetic neuralgia|Pain that lasts 3 months or longer after the shingles rash has healed. The associated pain has been described as burning, sharp and jabbing, or deep and aching.	Sensitivity to light touch. People with the condition often can't bear even the touch of clothing on the affected skin (allodynia).	Itching and numbness. Less commonly, postherpetic neuralgia can produce an itchy feeling or numbness.	|Capsaicin. Capsaicin cream, made from the seeds of hot chili peppers, may relieve pain from postherpetic neuralgia. Capsaicin (Capzasin-P, Zostrix) can cause a burning sensation and irritate your skin, but these side effects usually disappear over time. Because capsaicin cream can irritate your skin, avoid getting it on unaffected parts of your body. Follow instructions, including wearing gloves for application and washing your hands thoroughly after applying.	Topical analgesics and anesthetics. Aspirin mixed into an absorbing cream or nonprescription-strength lidocaine cream may reduce skin hypersensitivity.	
Postpartum depression|Mood swings	Anxiety	Sadness	Irritability	Feeling overwhelmed	Crying	Reduced concentration	Appetite problems	Trouble sleeping	|Make healthy lifestyle choices. Include physical activity, such as a walk with your baby, in your daily routine. Try to get adequate rest. Eat healthy foods and avoid alcohol.	Set realistic expectations. Don't pressure yourself to do everything. Scale back your expectations for the perfect household. Do what you can and leave the rest.	Make time for yourself. If you feel like the world is coming down around you, take some time for yourself. Get dressed, leave the house, and visit a friend or run an errand. Or schedule some time alone with your partner.	Avoid isolation. Talk with your partner, family and friends about how you're feeling. Ask other mothers about their experiences. Breaking the isolation may help you feel human again.	Ask for help. Try to open up to the people close to you and let them know you need help. If someone offers to baby-sit so you can take a break, take them up on it. If you can sleep, take a nap, or maybe you can catch a movie or meet for coffee with friends.	
Postpartum preeclampsia|High blood pressure (hypertension) — 140/90 millimeters of mercury (mm Hg) or greater	Excess protein in your urine (proteinuria)	Severe headaches	Changes in vision, including temporary loss of vision, blurred vision or light sensitivity	Swelling of the face and limbs	Upper abdominal pain, usually under the ribs on the right side	Nausea or vomiting	Decreased urination	Sudden weight gain, typically more than 2 pounds (0.9 kilogram) a week	|
Postpartum thyroiditis|Anxiety	Irritability	Rapid heartbeat or palpitations	Unexplained weight loss	Increased sensitivity to heat	Fatigue	Tremor	Insomnia	|
Post-polio syndrome|Progressive muscle and joint weakness and pain	General fatigue and exhaustion with minimal activity	Muscle atrophy	Breathing or swallowing problems	Sleep-related breathing disorders, such as sleep apnea	Decreased tolerance of cold temperatures	|Limit activities that cause pain or fatigue. Moderation is key. Overdoing it on a good day can lead to several subsequent bad days.	Be smart. Conserving your energy through lifestyle modifications and assistive devices doesn't mean you're giving in to the illness. It just means you've found a smarter way to deal with it.	Stay warm. Cold increases muscle fatigue. Keep your home at a comfortable temperature and dress in layers, especially when you go out.	Avoid falls. Get rid of throw rugs and loose clutter on the floor, wear good shoes, and avoid slippery or icy surfaces.	Maintain a healthy lifestyle. Eat a balanced diet, stop smoking and decrease caffeine intake to keep fit, breathe easier and sleep better.	Protect your lungs. If your breathing is impaired, watch for signs of a developing respiratory infection, which can make breathing problems worse, and have it treated promptly. Also, avoid smoking and stay current with your flu and pneumonia vaccines.	
Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD)|Recurrent, unwanted distressing memories of the traumatic event	Reliving the traumatic event as if it were happening again (flashbacks)	Upsetting dreams about the traumatic event	Severe emotional distress or physical reactions to something that reminds you of the event	|
Prader-Willi syndrome|Poor muscle tone. A primary sign during infancy is poor muscle tone (hypotonia). Babies may rest with their elbows and knees loosely extended instead of fixed, and they may feel floppy or like rag dolls when they're held.	Distinct facial features. Children may be born with almond-shaped eyes, a narrowing of the head at the temples, a turned-down mouth and a thin upper lip.	Failure to thrive. Infants may have a poor sucking reflex due to decreased muscle tone. Because poor sucking makes feeding difficult, they tend to gain weight slowly.	Lack of eye coordination (strabismus). The child's eyes may not move together — they may cross or wander to the side.	Generally poor responsiveness. A baby may seem unusually tired, respond poorly to stimulation, have a hard time waking up or have a weak cry.	|Pick up your child carefully. Babies and children with Prader-Willi syndrome have poor muscle tone, which increases their risk of slipping between your hands when you lift them under their armpits.	Stick to a strict meal plan. Eating a low-calorie diet is essential to keep your child from becoming overweight. Structure meal times and the type of food provided to help develop routines and to help your child understand expectations.	Take steps to help prevent binge eating. Avoid buying high-calorie snacks. Store food out of your child's reach. Lock pantries, refrigerators and cupboards. Use small dishes for serving meals.	Ask about supplements for your child's diet. If your child is on a restricted-calorie diet, ask your health care provider if supplemental vitamins or minerals are necessary to ensure balanced nutrition.	Encourage regular daily activity. Increasing physical activity and exercise can help manage weight and improve physical functioning.	Set limits. Create a firm schedule and work on behavioral problems. If needed, seek help to address problems.	Schedule appropriate screening tests. Talk with your health care provider about how often screening is needed for complications of Prader-Willi syndrome, such as diabetes, osteoporosis or an abnormally curved spine (scoliosis).	
Precocious puberty|Breast growth	First period (menarche)	|
Prediabetes|Increased thirst	Frequent urination	Fatigue	Blurred vision	|
Preeclampsia|Excess protein in your urine (proteinuria) or additional signs of kidney problems	Severe headaches	Changes in vision, including temporary loss of vision, blurred vision or light sensitivity	Upper abdominal pain, usually under your ribs on the right side	Nausea or vomiting	Decreased urine output	Decreased levels of platelets in your blood (thrombocytopenia)	Impaired liver function	Shortness of breath, caused by fluid in your lungs	|
Prehypertension||Eat healthy foods. Eat a healthy diet. Try the Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension (DASH) diet. Choose fruits, vegetables, whole grains, poultry, fish and low-fat dairy foods. Get plenty of potassium, which can help lower blood pressure. Eat less saturated fat and trans fat.	Maintain a healthy weight. Keeping a healthy weight, or losing weight if you're overweight or obese, can help you control your blood pressure and lower your risk of related health problems. If you're overweight, losing even 5 pounds (2.3 kilograms) can lower your blood pressure.	 Use less salt. The Dietary Guidelines for Americans recommend limiting sodium to less than 2,300 mg a day. A lower sodium level — 1,500 milligrams (mg) a day — is appropriate for people 51 years of age or older, and individuals of any age who are black or who have hypertension, diabetes or chronic kidney disease. While you can reduce the amount of salt you eat by putting down the saltshaker, you usually should also pay attention to the amount of salt that's in the processed foods you eat, such as canned soups or frozen dinners. 	 Increase physical activity. Regular physical activity can help lower your blood pressure, manage stress, reduce your risk of other health problems and keep your weight under control. For most healthy adults, the Department of Health and Human Services recommends that you get at least 150 minutes a week of moderate aerobic activity or 75 minutes a week of vigorous aerobic activity, or a combination or moderate and vigorous activity. Aim to do muscle-strengthening exercises at least two days a week. 	Limit alcohol. If you choose to drink alcohol, do so in moderation. For healthy adults, that means up to one drink a day for women of all ages and men older than age 65, and up to two drinks a day for men age 65 and younger. One drink equals 12 ounces of beer, 5 ounces of wine or 1.5 ounces of 80-proof liquor.	Don't smoke. Tobacco injures blood vessel walls and speeds up the process of hardening of the arteries. If you smoke, ask your doctor to help you quit.	Manage stress. Reduce stress as much as possible. Practice healthy coping techniques, such as muscle relaxation, deep breathing or meditation. Getting regular physical activity and plenty of sleep can help, too.	
Premature birth|Small size, with a disproportionately large head	Sharper looking, less rounded features than a full-term baby's features, due to a lack of fat stores	Fine hair (lanugo) covering much of the body	Low body temperature, especially immediately after birth in the delivery room, due to a lack of stored body fat	Labored breathing or respiratory distress	Lack of reflexes for sucking and swallowing, leading to feeding difficulties	| Understand how to care for your baby. Before you leave the hospital, take a course in infant CPR. Ask your baby's medical team any questions you might have and take notes. Make sure you're comfortable caring for your baby, especially if you'll need to administer medications, use special monitors, or give your baby supplemental oxygen or other treatments. Discuss symptoms — such as infant breathing or feeding problems — that might necessitate a call to your baby's care provider. 	Discuss feedings. Ask the medical team about your baby's need for supplementation in the form of breast milk fortifiers or preterm infant formula. Keep in mind that premature babies usually eat less and may need to be fed more often than full-term babies. Find out how much and how often your baby should be eating.	 Protect your baby's health. Premature babies are more susceptible to serious infections than are other newborns. Try to minimize your preemie's exposure to crowded places and make sure everyone who comes into contact with your child washes his or her hands first. Ask people who are ill to postpone their visit until after your baby's first few weeks at home. Because preemies are especially at risk of a serious infection of the lungs and respiratory tract (respiratory syncytial virus, or RSV), your baby's doctor might recommend a preventive medication called palivizumab (Synagis), which helps protect your baby from this serious infection. 	Follow a recommended schedule for checkups. Discuss your baby's need for future appointments with your baby's care provider and any specialists. Your preemie may initially need to see his or her care provider every week or two to have his or her growth, medical needs and care monitored.	 Stay on top of vaccinations. While it's recommended that immunizations be given to medically stable premature babies according to their chronological age, delays in the immunization schedule are common. Work with your baby's care provider to stay on top of your baby's need for vaccinations. You may also protect your preemie by ensuring that others in the home are up to date on their immunizations, including influenza. Pregnant women, family members and adult caregivers should check with their doctors to be sure they're up to date on their whooping cough (pertussis) vaccine. 	Monitor for developmental delays. Your baby's care provider may also monitor your baby for developmental delays and disabilities in the coming months. Babies who are identified as at risk may receive further evaluation and be referred to early intervention services. Eligibility for such programs varies by state.	
Premature ejaculation||Always or nearly always ejaculate within one minute of penetration	Are unable to delay ejaculation during intercourse all or nearly all of the time	Feel distressed and frustrated, and tend to avoid sexual intimacy as a result	
Premature ovarian failure|Irregular or skipped periods (amenorrhea), which may be present for years or may develop after a pregnancy or after stopping birth control pills	Hot flashes	Night sweats	Vaginal dryness	Irritability or difficulty concentrating	Decreased sexual desire	|Learn about alternatives for having children. If you'd like to add to your family, talk to your doctor about options such as in vitro fertilization using donor eggs or adoption.	Talk with your doctor about the best contraception options. A small percentage of women with premature ovarian failure do spontaneously conceive. If you don't want to become pregnant, consider using birth control.	Keep your bones strong. Women who produce low levels of the hormone estrogen are at an increased risk of developing osteoporosis. Work on maintaining strong bones. To do that, eat a calcium-rich diet, ask your doctor if you need calcium and vitamin D supplements, do weight-bearing exercises such as walking and strength-training exercises for your upper body, and avoid smoking.	
Premature ventricular contractions|Flip-flops	Fluttering	Pounding or jumping	Skipped beats or missed beats	Increased awareness of your heartbeat	|Track your triggers. If you have frequent symptoms, you might want to take note of your symptoms and your activities. This can help identify substances or actions that may trigger premature ventricular contractions.	Modify your substance use. Caffeine, alcohol, tobacco and other recreational drugs are known triggers of premature ventricular contractions. Reducing or avoiding these substances can reduce your symptoms.	Manage stress. Anxiety can trigger abnormal heartbeats. If you think anxiety may be contributing to your condition, try stress-reduction techniques, such as biofeedback, meditation or exercise, or talk to your doctor about anti-anxiety medications.	
Premenstrual syndrome (PMS)|Tension or anxiety	Depressed mood	Crying spells	Mood swings and irritability or anger	Appetite changes and food cravings	Trouble falling asleep (insomnia)	Social withdrawal	Poor concentration	|Eat smaller, more-frequent meals to reduce bloating and the sensation of fullness.	Limit salt and salty foods to reduce bloating and fluid retention.	Choose foods high in complex carbohydrates, such as fruits, vegetables and whole grains.	Choose foods rich in calcium. If you can't tolerate dairy products or aren't getting adequate calcium in your diet, a daily calcium supplement may help.	Avoid caffeine and alcohol.	
Presbyopia|A tendency to hold reading material farther away to make the letters clearer	Blurred vision at normal reading distance	Eyestrain or headaches after reading or doing close work	|Have your eyes checked. Do this regularly even if you see well. 	Control chronic health conditions. Certain conditions, such as diabetes and high blood pressure, can affect your vision if you don't receive proper treatment.	Protect your eyes from the sun. Wear sunglasses that block ultraviolet (UV) radiation. This is especially important if you spend long hours in the sun or are taking a prescription medication that increases your sensitivity to UV radiation.	Prevent eye injuries. Wear protective eyewear when doing certain things, such as playing sports, mowing the lawn, or painting or using other products with toxic fumes.	Eat healthy foods. Try to eat plenty of fruits, leafy greens and other vegetables. These foods generally contain high levels of antioxidants as well as vitamin A and beta carotene. They're also vital to maintaining healthy vision.	Use the right glasses. The right glasses optimize your vision. Having regular exams will ensure that your eyeglass prescription is correct.	Use good lighting. Turn up or add light for better vision.	Recognize symptoms. You may have a serious medical problem if you have a sudden loss of vision in one eye, experience sudden hazy or blurred vision, or see flashes of light, black spots or halos around lights. These may indicate certain conditions, such as glaucoma, stroke, or a retinal tear or detachment. See your doctor immediately if you experience any of these symptoms.	
Prescription drug abuse|Opioids, such as oxycodone (Oxycontin, Roxicodone) and those containing hydrocodone (Vicodin, Lortab, Norco), used to treat pain	Anti-anxiety medications and sedatives, such as alprazolam (Xanax) and diazepam (Valium), and hypnotics, such as zolpidem (Ambien), used to treat anxiety and sleep disorders	Stimulants, such as methylphenidate (Ritalin, Concerta, others), dextroamphetamine and amphetamine (Adderall XR) and dextroamphetamine (Dexedrine), used to treat attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) and certain sleep disorder	|
Preterm labor|Regular or frequent contractions — a tightening sensation in the abdomen	Constant low, dull backache	A sensation of pelvic or lower abdominal pressure	Mild abdominal cramps 	Diarrhea	Vaginal spotting or bleeding	Watery vaginal discharge (water breaking) — in a gush or a trickle	A change in vaginal discharge	|Treatments and drugs	Coping and support	
Priapism|Unwanted erection lasting more than four hours 	Unwanted erection off and on for several hours (stuttering priapism) 	Rigid penile shaft, but usually soft tip of penis (glans) 	Usually painful or tender penis 	|
Primary aldosteronism|Moderate to severe high blood pressure	High blood pressure that takes several medications to control (resistant hypertension)	High blood pressure along with a low potassium level (hypokalemia)	|Follow a healthy diet. Limit the sodium in your diet by focusing on fresh foods and reduced-sodium products, avoiding condiments, and removing salt from recipes. Diets that also emphasize a healthy variety of foods — including grains, fruits, vegetables and low-fat dairy products — can promote weight loss and help lower blood pressure. Try the Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension (DASH) diet — it has proven benefits for your heart.	Achieve a healthy weight. If your body mass index (BMI) is 25 or more, losing as few as 10 pounds (4.5 kilograms) may reduce your blood pressure.	Exercise. Regular aerobic exercise can help lower blood pressure. You don't have to hit the gym — taking vigorous walks most days of the week can significantly improve your health. Try walking with a friend at lunch instead of dining out.	Don't smoke. Quitting smoking will improve your overall cardiovascular health. Nicotine in tobacco makes your heart work harder by constricting your blood vessels and increasing your heart rate and blood pressure. Talk to your doctor about medications that can help you stop smoking.	Limit alcohol and caffeine. Both substances can raise your blood pressure, and alcohol can interfere with the effectiveness of some blood pressure medications. Ask your doctor whether moderate alcohol consumption is safe for you.	
Primary biliary cirrhosis|Fatigue	Itchy skin	Dry eyes and mouth	|Choose reduced-sodium foods. Opt for low-sodium foods or naturally sodium-free foods, since sodium contributes to tissue swelling and to the buildup of fluid in your abdominal cavity (ascites).	Exercise most days of the week. Exercise may reduce your risk of bone loss.	Avoid alcohol. Your liver processes the alcohol you drink, and the added stress can cause liver damage. Generally, people with primary biliary cirrhosis should abstain from alcohol.	Check with your doctor before starting new medications or dietary supplements. Because your liver isn't working normally, you'll likely be more sensitive to the effects of over-the-counter and prescription medications, as well as some dietary supplements, so check with your doctor before taking anything new.	
Primary immunodeficiency|Frequent and recurrent pneumonia, bronchitis, sinus infections, ear infections, meningitis or skin infections	Inflammation and infection of internal organs	Blood disorders, such as low platelet counts or anemia	Digestive problems, such as cramping, loss of appetite, nausea and diarrhea	Delayed growth and development	Autoimmune disorders, such as lupus, rheumatoid arthritis or type 1 diabetes	|
Primary sclerosing cholangitis|Fatigue	Itching	|Don't drink alcohol.	Get vaccinated against hepatitis A and B.	Use care with chemicals at home and at work.	Maintain a healthy weight.	Follow directions on all medications, both prescription and over the counter. Make sure your pharmacist and any doctor prescribing for you know that you have a liver disease.	Talk to your doctor about any herbs or supplements you're taking since some can be harmful to your liver.	
Proctitis|A frequent or continuous feeling that you need to have a bowel movement	Rectal bleeding	The passing of mucus through your rectum	Rectal pain	Pain on the left side of your abdomen	A feeling of fullness in your rectum	Diarrhea	Pain with bowel movements	|Ask your doctor before using over-the-counter (OTC) diarrhea medicines. Don't take OTC anti-diarrhea drugs, such as loperamide (Imodium A-D), without your doctor's OK.	Avoid food just before bedtime. Eating just before going to bed may stimulate your digestive system and cause you to have bowel movements and discomfort at night.	Take over-the-counter pain relievers. Acetaminophen (Tylenol, others) may be helpful, but ask your doctor before taking aspirin or ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin IB, others), as in some cases these may make your proctitis worse.	Use a sitz bath with warm water. A sitz bath fits over the toilet. You can get one at a medical supply store or some pharmacies. This may provide some comfort if you experience anal inflammation.	
Progeria|Slowed growth, with below-average height and weight	Narrowed face, small lower jaw, thin lips and beaked nose	Head disproportionately large for face	Prominent eyes and incomplete closure of the eyelids	Hair loss, including eyelashes and eyebrows	Thinning, spotty, wrinkled skin	Visible veins	High-pitched voice	|Make sure your child stays well-hydrated. Dehydration can be more serious in children with progeria. Be sure your child drinks plenty of water, especially during an illness or in hot weather.	Provide frequent, small meals. Because nutrition and growth can be an issue for children with progeria, giving your child smaller meals more often may help to increase calorie intake.	Provide opportunities for regular physical activity. Check with your child's doctor to learn which activities are best for your child.	Get cushioned shoes or shoe inserts for your child. The loss of body fat in the feet can cause discomfort.	Use sunscreen. Use a broad-spectrum sunscreen with an SPF of at least 15. Apply sunscreen generously, and reapply every two hours — or more often if your child is swimming or perspiring. 	Make sure your child is up to date on childhood immunizations. A child with progeria isn't at increased risk of infection, but like all children, is at risk if exposed to infectious diseases.	Provide learning opportunities. Progeria won't affect your child's intellect, so he or she can attend school at an age-appropriate level.	
Prolactinoma|Irregular menstrual periods (oligomenorrhea) or no menstrual periods (amenorrhea)	Milky discharge from the breasts (galactorrhea) when not pregnant or breast-feeding	Painful intercourse due to vaginal dryness	Acne and excessive body and facial hair growth (hirsutism)	|
Prostate cancer|Trouble urinating	Decreased force in the stream of urine	Blood in the semen	Discomfort in the pelvic area	Bone pain	Erectile dysfunction	|
Prostatitis|Pain or burning sensation when urinating (dysuria)	Difficulty urinating, such as dribbling or hesitant urination	Frequent urination, particularly at night (nocturia)	Urgent need to urinate	Pain in the abdomen, groin or lower back	Pain in the area between the scrotum and rectum (perineum)	Pain or discomfort of the penis or testicles	Painful orgasms (ejaculations)	Flu-like symptoms (with bacterial prostatitis)	|Soak in a warm bath (sitz bath).	Limit or avoid alcohol, caffeine, and spicy or acidic foods.	Avoid prolonged sitting or try sitting on a pillow or inflatable cushion to ease pressure on the prostate.	Avoid bicycling, or wear padded shorts and adjust your bicycle to relieve pressure on your prostate.	
Pseudogout|Swollen	Warm	Severely painful	|NSAIDs. Over-the-counter NSAIDs, such as ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin IB, others) and naproxen sodium (Aleve), often are helpful.	Rest the joint. Try not to use the affected joint for a couple of days.	Ice. Cold packs can help reduce the inflammation associated with flare-ups.	
Pseudotumor cerebri|Moderate to severe headaches that may originate behind your eyes and worsen with eye movement	Ringing in the ears that pulses in time with your heartbeat (pulsatile tinnitus)	Nausea, vomiting or dizziness	Blurred or dimmed vision	Brief episodes of blindness, lasting only a few seconds and affecting one or both eyes (visual obscurations)	Difficulty seeing to the side	Double vision (diplopia)	Seeing light flashes (photopsia)	Neck, shoulder or back pain	|Treatments and drugs	
Psoriasis|Red patches of skin covered with silvery scales	Small scaling spots (commonly seen in children)	Dry, cracked skin that may bleed	Itching, burning or soreness	Thickened, pitted or ridged nails	Swollen and stiff joints	|Take daily baths. Bathing daily helps remove scales and calm inflamed skin. Add bath oil, colloidal oatmeal, Epsom salts or Dead Sea salts to the water and soak. Avoid hot water and harsh soaps, which can worsen symptoms; use lukewarm water and mild soaps that have added oils and fats.	Use moisturizer. Blot your skin after bathing, then immediately apply a heavy, ointment-based moisturizer while your skin is still moist. For very dry skin, oils may be preferable — they have more staying power than creams or lotions do and are more effective at preventing water from evaporating from your skin. During cold, dry weather, you may need to apply a moisturizer several times a day.	Expose your skin to small amounts of sunlight. A controlled amount of sunlight can significantly improve lesions, but too much sun can trigger or worsen outbreaks and increase the risk of skin cancer. Before beginning any sunbathing program, ask your doctor about the best way to use natural sunlight to treat your skin. Keep a record of when and how long you're in the sun to help avoid overexposure. And be sure to protect healthy, unaffected skin with a broad-spectrum sunscreen with an SPF of at least 30. Apply sunscreen generously, and reapply every two hours — or more often if you're swimming or perspiring.	Avoid psoriasis triggers, if possible. Find out what triggers, if any, worsen your psoriasis and take steps to prevent or avoid them. Infections, injuries to your skin, stress, smoking and intense sun exposure can all worsen psoriasis.	Avoid drinking alcohol. Alcohol consumption may decrease the effectiveness of some psoriasis treatments.	
Psoriatic arthritis|Swollen fingers and toes. Psoriatic arthritis can cause a painful, sausage-like swelling of your fingers and toes. You may also develop swelling and deformities in your hands and feet before having significant joint symptoms.	Foot pain. Psoriatic arthritis can also cause pain at the points where tendons and ligaments attach to your bones — especially at the back of your heel (Achilles tendinitis) or in the sole of your foot (plantar fasciitis).	Lower back pain. Some people develop a condition called spondylitis as a result of psoriatic arthritis. Spondylitis mainly causes inflammation of the joints between the vertebrae of your spine and in the joints between your spine and pelvis (sacroiliitis).	|Protect your joints. Changing the way you carry out everyday tasks can make a tremendous difference in how you feel. For example, you can avoid straining your finger joints by using gadgets such as jar openers to twist the lids from jars, by lifting heavy pans or other objects with both hands, and by pushing doors open with your whole body instead of just your fingers.	Maintain a healthy weight. Maintaining a healthy weight places less strain on your joints, leading to reduced pain and increased energy and mobility. The best way to increase nutrients while limiting calories is to eat more plant-based foods — fruits, vegetables and whole grains.	Exercise regularly. Exercise can help keep your joints flexible and your muscles strong. Types of exercises that are less stressful on joints include biking, swimming and walking.	Use cold and hot packs. Because cold has a numbing effect, it can dull the sensation of pain. You can apply cold several times a day for 20 or 30 minutes at a time. Heat can help relax tense muscles and relieve pain.	Pace yourself. Battling pain and inflammation can leave you feeling exhausted. In addition, some arthritis medications can cause fatigue. The key isn't to stop being active entirely, but to rest before you become too tired. Divide exercise or work activities into short segments. Find time to relax several times throughout the day.	
Pulmonary edema|Extreme shortness of breath or difficulty breathing (dyspnea) that worsens when lying down 	A feeling of suffocating or drowning 	Wheezing or gasping for breath 	Anxiety, restlessness or a sense of apprehension 	A cough that produces frothy sputum that may be tinged with blood 	Chest pain if pulmonary edema is caused by heart disease 	A rapid, irregular heartbeat (palpitations) 	|Controlling your high blood pressure. If you have high blood pressure, take your medications as prescribed and check your blood pressure regularly. Record the results. Ask your doctor for guidelines regarding your optimal blood pressure.	Controlling other medical conditions. Control any underlying medical conditions, such as controlling your glucose levels if you have diabetes.	Avoiding the cause of your condition. If your condition is due to drugs, allergens or high altitudes, avoid these to minimize further damage to your lungs. 	Quitting smoking. If you smoke, quit smoking.	Eating a healthy diet. Your doctor may recommend that you follow a low-salt diet. Ask for a referral to a dietitian if you need help evaluating the salt content in foods. Also eat a healthy diet of fruits, vegetables and whole grains.	Maintaining a healthy weight and exercising. Maintain a healthy weight and exercise regularly. 	
Pulmonary embolism|Shortness of breath. This symptom typically appears suddenly and always gets worse with exertion.	Chest pain. You may feel like you're having a heart attack. The pain may become worse when you breathe deeply (pleurisy), cough, eat, bend or stoop. The pain will get worse with exertion but won't go away when you rest.	Cough. The cough may produce bloody or blood-streaked sputum.	|
Pulmonary fibrosis|Shortness of breath (dyspnea)	A dry cough	Fatigue	Unexplained weight loss	Aching muscles and joints	|Stop smoking. If you have lung disease, the best thing you can do for yourself is to stop smoking. Talk to your doctor about options for quitting, including smoking cessation programs, which use a variety of proven techniques to help people quit. And because secondhand smoke can be harmful to your lungs, don't allow other people to smoke around you.	Eat well. People with lung disease may lose weight both because it's uncomfortable to eat and because of the extra energy it takes to breathe. Yet a nutritionally rich diet that contains adequate calories is essential. A dietitian can give you further guidelines for healthy eating.	Get vaccinated. Respiratory infections can worsen symptoms of pulmonary fibrosis. Make sure you receive the pneumonia vaccine and an annual flu shot. Your family members must also be vaccinated, and you should avoid crowds in flu season.	
Pulmonary hypertension|Shortness of breath (dyspnea), initially while exercising and eventually while at rest	Fatigue	Dizziness or fainting spells (syncope)	Chest pressure or pain	Swelling (edema) in your ankles, legs and eventually in your abdomen (ascites)	Bluish color to your lips and skin (cyanosis)	Racing pulse or heart palpitations	|Get plenty of rest. Resting can reduce the fatigue that may come from having pulmonary hypertension.	Stay as active as possible. Even the mildest forms of activity may be too exhausting for some people with pulmonary hypertension. For others, moderate exercise such as walking may be beneficial, and using oxygen during exercise may be especially helpful. But first, talk to your doctor about specific exercise restrictions. In most cases, it's recommended that you not lift more than 50 pounds (22.7 kilograms). Your doctor can help you plan an appropriate exercise program.	Don't smoke. If you smoke, the most important thing you can do for your heart and lung health is to stop. If you can't stop smoking by yourself, ask your doctor to prescribe a treatment plan to help you quit. Also, avoid secondhand smoke if possible.	Avoid becoming pregnant or using birth control pills. If you're a woman of childbearing age, avoid becoming pregnant. Pregnancy can be life-threatening for both you and your baby. Also avoid using birth control pills, which can increase your risk of blood clots. Talk to your doctor about alternative forms of birth control.	Avoid traveling to or living at high altitudes. High altitudes can worsen the symptoms of pulmonary hypertension. If you live at an altitude of 8,000 feet (2,438 meters) or higher, your doctor may recommend that you move to a lower elevation.	Avoid situations that can excessively lower blood pressure. These include sitting in a hot tub or sauna or taking long hot baths or showers. These activities lower your blood pressure and cause fainting or even death. You should also avoid activities that cause prolonged straining, such as lifting heavy objects or weights.	Find ways to reduce stress. These can range from yoga, meditation and biofeedback to warm baths, music or a good book. Try to allow at least 30 minutes a day for an activity you find relaxing. Many people with pulmonary hypertension find that simply reducing stress can greatly improve the quality of their lives.	Follow a nutritious diet and stay at a healthy weight. It's likely your doctor will recommend limiting the amount of salt in your diet to minimize swelling of your body's tissues (edema). Most experts agree that you should eat no more than 1,500 to 2,400 milligrams of salt a day. Keep in mind that processed foods often are high in salt, so it's important to check labels carefully.	
Pulmonary valve stenosis|Heart murmur — an abnormal whooshing sound heard using a stethoscope, caused by turbulent blood flow	Shortness of breath, especially during exertion	Chest pain	Loss of consciousness (fainting)	Fatigue	|Quitting smoking. Smoking and other tobacco use is a significant risk factor for heart disease. Try to avoid secondhand smoke, as well.	Eating a heart-healthy diet. Focus on eating a diet that's low in sodium, cholesterol and saturated fat. Try to eat more fruits and vegetables, fish, low-fat dairy products, whole grains, and lean meat.	Maintaining a healthy weight. Excess weight may make you short of breath and may complicate heart surgery if you ever need it. Keep your weight within a range recommended by your doctor.	Exercising. Physical activity may help to keep your body fit and may help you to recover faster if you ever need heart surgery. How long and hard you're able to exercise may depend on what level of activity triggers your symptoms, if any. Ask your doctor for guidance before starting any exercise program.	Seeing your doctor regularly. Establish a regular appointment schedule with your cardiologist or primary care provider. If you had treatment for pulmonary valve stenosis as a child, tell your doctors, even if it hasn't caused any problems for you as an adult.	
Q fever|High fever, up to 105 F (41 C)	Severe headache	Fatigue	Cough	Nausea	Diarrhea	Sensitivity to light	|
Rabies|Fever	Headache	Nausea	Vomiting	Agitation	Anxiety	Confusion	Hyperactivity	Difficulty swallowing	Excessive salivation	Fear of water (hydrophobia) because of the difficulty in swallowing	Hallucinations	Insomnia	Partial paralysis	|
Ramsay Hunt syndrome|A painful red rash with fluid-filled blisters on, in and around one ear	Facial weakness or paralysis on the same side as the affected ear	|Keep areas affected by the rash clean.	Apply cool, wet compresses to the rash to ease pain.	Take an over-the-counter pain reliever or anti-inflammatory drug, such as ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin IB, others).	
Raynaud's disease|Cold fingers or toes	Color changes in your skin in response to cold or stress	Numb, prickly feeling or stinging pain upon warming or stress relief	|Don't smoke. Smoking causes skin temperature to drop by constricting blood vessels, which may lead to an attack. Inhaling secondhand smoke also can aggravate Raynaud's.	Exercise. Exercise can increase circulation, among other health benefits. If you have secondary Raynaud's, talk to your doctor before exercising outdoors in the cold.	Control stress. Learning to recognize and avoid stressful situations may help control the number of attacks.	Avoid rapidly changing temperatures. Try not to move from a hot environment to an air-conditioned room. If possible, avoid frozen-food sections of grocery stores.	
Reactive arthritis|Pain and stiffness. The joint pain associated with reactive arthritis most commonly occurs in your knees, ankles and feet. You also might experience pain in your heels, low back or buttocks.	Eye inflammation. Many people who have reactive arthritis also develop eye inflammation (conjunctivitis).	Urinary problems. Increased frequency and discomfort during urination may occur, as can inflammation of the prostate gland or cervix.	Swollen toes or fingers. In some cases, your toes or fingers might become so swollen that they resemble sausages.	|
Reactive attachment disorder|Withdrawal, fear, sadness or irritability that is not readily explained	Sad and listless appearance	Not seeking comfort or showing no response when comfort is given	Failure to smile	Watching others closely but not engaging in social interaction	Failing to ask for support or assistance	Failure to reach out when picked up	No interest in playing peekaboo or other interactive games	|
Rebound headaches|Occur every day or nearly every day, often waking you in the early morning	Improve with pain relief medication but then return as your medication wears off	|
Rectovaginal fistula|Passage of gas, stool or pus from your vagina	Foul-smelling vaginal discharge	Recurrent vaginal or urinary tract infections	Irritation or pain in the vulva, vagina and the area between your vagina and anus (perineum)	Pain during sexual intercourse	|Wash with water. Shower or gently wash your outer genital area with just warm water each time you experience vaginal discharge or passage of stool.	Avoid irritants. Soap can dry and irritate your skin, but you may need a gentle unscented soap in moderation. Avoid harsh or scented soap and scented tampons and pads. Vaginal douches can increase your chance of infection.	Dry thoroughly. Allow the area to air-dry after washing, or gently pat the area dry with a clean cloth or towel.	Avoid rubbing with dry toilet paper. Pre-moistened, alcohol-free, unscented towelettes or wipes or moistened cotton balls are a good alternative.	Apply a cream or powder. Moisture-barrier creams protect irritated skin from liquid or stool. Nonmedicated talcum powder or cornstarch also may help relieve discomfort. Ask your doctor to recommend a product. Be sure the area is clean and dry before you apply any cream or powder.	Wear cotton underwear and loose clothing. Tight clothing can restrict airflow and worsen skin problems. Change soiled underwear quickly. Products such as absorbent pads, disposable underwear or adult diapers can help if you're passing liquid or stool, but be sure they have an absorbent wicking layer on top.	
Recurrent breast cancer|A new lump in your breast or irregular area of firmness	Changes to the skin of your breast	Skin inflammation or area of redness	Nipple discharge	|
REM sleep behavior disorder|Movement, such as kicking, punching, arm flailing or jumping from bed in response to the content of action-filled or violent dreams, such as being chased or defending yourself from an attack	Noises, such as talking, laughing, shouting, emotional outcries or even profanity	Being able to recall the dream if you are woken up during the episode	|
Renal artery stenosis|High blood pressure that begins suddenly	High blood pressure that begins before age 30 or after age 55	|Maintain a healthy weight. When your weight increases, so does your blood pressure. If you're overweight, even losing 10 pounds may help to lower your blood pressure.	Restrict salt in your diet. Salt and salty foods cause your body to retain fluid. This may increase the volume of your blood and, in turn, increase your blood pressure.	Be physically active. Being physically active on a regular basis may help you lose weight, lower your risk of heart disease, lower your cholesterol and lower your blood pressure. Check with your doctor before beginning an exercise program, especially if you have high blood pressure and haven't been active in the past.	Reduce stress. Stress can increase your blood pressure temporarily. This increase varies, depending on your level of stress and how your body reacts to it.	Drink alcohol in moderation, if at all. Too much alcohol may increase your blood pressure.	Don't smoke. Tobacco injures blood vessel walls and speeds up the process of hardening of the arteries. If you smoke, ask your doctor to help you quit.	
Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV)|Congested or runny nose	Dry cough	Low-grade fever	Sore throat	Mild headache	|Create moist air. Keep your room or your child's room warm but not overheated. If the air is dry, a cool-mist humidifier or vaporizer can moisten the air and help ease congestion and coughing. Be sure to keep the humidifier clean, to prevent the growth of bacteria and molds. An ideal indoor humidity is around 50 percent.	Keep your child in an upright position. Sitting upright makes breathing easier. Placing your infant in a car seat may help. When sleeping, place your infant on his or her back on a firm mattress as usual, but elevate the head of the mattress about 3 inches (7.6 centimeters) with an object underneath the mattress.	Encourage your child to drink fluids. Keep a steady supply of cool water at the bedside, and offer warm fluids, such as soup, which may help loosen thickened secretions. Ice pops may be soothing as well. Continue breast-feeding or bottle-feeding your infant as you would normally.	 Try saline nasal drops. Over-the-counter (OTC) drops are a safe, effective way to ease congestion, even for young children. Drip several drops into one nostril to loosen hardened or thick mucus, then immediately suction that nostril, using a bulb syringe. Repeat the process in the other nostril. Do this before feedings and before putting your baby down to sleep. 	Use over-the-counter pain relievers. OTC pain relievers such as acetaminophen (Tylenol, others) may help reduce fever, relieve a sore throat and improve ability to drink fluids. Check with your doctor about age-appropriate use and doses of such medications.	Eliminate exposure to cigarette smoke. Stay away from cigarette smoke because it can aggravate symptoms.	
Restless legs syndrome|Sensation starts after being at rest. The sensation typically begins after you've been lying down or sitting for an extended time, such as in a car, airplane or movie theater.	Relief by movement. The sensation of RLS/WED lessens with movement, such as stretching, jiggling your legs, pacing or walking.	Worsening of symptoms in the evening. Symptoms occur mainly at night.	Nighttime leg twitching. RLS/WED may be associated with another, more common condition called periodic limb movement of sleep, which causes your legs to twitch and kick, possibly throughout the night, while you sleep.	|Try baths and massages. Soaking in a warm bath and massaging your legs can relax your muscles.	Apply warm or cool packs. Use of heat or cold, or alternating use of the two, may lessen your limb sensations.	Try relaxation techniques, such as meditation or yoga. Stress can aggravate RLS/WED. Learn to relax, especially before bedtime.	Establish good sleep hygiene. Fatigue tends to worsen symptoms of RLS/WED, so it's important that you practice good sleep hygiene. Ideally, have a cool, quiet, comfortable sleeping environment; go to bed and rise at the same time daily; and get adequate sleep. Some people with RLS/WED find that going to bed later and rising later in the day helps in getting enough sleep.	Exercise. Getting moderate, regular exercise may relieve symptoms of RLS/WED, but overdoing it or working out too late in the day may intensify symptoms.	Avoid caffeine. Sometimes cutting back on caffeine may help restless legs. Try to avoid caffeine-containing products, including chocolate and caffeinated beverages, such as coffee, tea and soft drinks, for a few weeks to see if this helps.	
Retinal detachment|The sudden appearance of many floaters — small bits of debris in your field of vision that look like spots, hairs or strings and seem to float before your eyes	Sudden flashes of light in the affected eye	A shadow or curtain over a portion of your visual field that develops as the detachment progresses	|
Retractile testicle|The testicle may be moved by hand from the groin into the scrotum and won't immediately retreat to the groin.	The testicle might spontaneously appear in the scrotum and remain there for a time.	The testicle might spontaneously disappear again for a time.	|Check the position of the testicles regularly during diaper changing or at bath time. Keep a record of any changes.	Give your son the vocabulary to talk about the scrotum and testicles. Explain that there are usually two testicles in the scrotum.	When he's about to reach puberty — usually around sixth grade — and you're talking about what physical changes to expect, explain how he can check his testicles.	
Retrograde ejaculation|Dry orgasms, orgasms in which you ejaculate very little or no semen out of your penis	Urine that is cloudy after orgasm (because it contains semen)	Inability to get a woman pregnant (male infertility)	|
Rett syndrome|Slowed growth. Brain growth slows after birth. Smaller than normal head size (microcephaly) is usually the first sign that a child has Rett syndrome. As children get older, delayed growth in other parts of the body becomes evident.	Loss of normal movement and coordination. The first signs often include reduced hand control and a decreasing ability to crawl or walk normally. At first, this loss of abilities occurs rapidly and then it continues more gradually. Eventually muscles become weak or may become rigid or spastic with abnormal movement and positioning.	Loss of communication abilities. Children with Rett syndrome typically begin to lose the ability to speak, to make eye contact and to communicate in other ways. They may become disinterested in other people, toys and their surroundings. Some children have rapid changes, such as a sudden loss of speech. Over time, most children gradually regain eye contact and develop nonverbal communication skills.	Abnormal hand movements. Children with Rett syndrome typically develop repetitive, purposeless hand movements that may differ for each person. Hand movements may include hand wringing, squeezing, clapping, tapping or rubbing.	Unusual eye movements. Children with Rett syndrome tend to have unusual eye movements, such as intense staring, blinking, crossed eyes or closing one eye at a time.	Breathing problems. These include breath-holding, abnormally rapid breathing (hyperventilation), forceful exhalation of air or saliva, and swallowing air. These problems tend to occur during waking hours, but not during sleep.	Agitation and irritability. Children with Rett syndrome become increasingly agitated and irritable as they get older. Periods of crying or screaming may begin suddenly, for no apparent reason, and last for hours.	Other abnormal behaviors. These may include, for example, sudden, odd facial expressions and long bouts of laughter, hand licking, and grasping of hair or clothing.	Cognitive disabilities. Loss of skills can be accompanied by a loss of intellectual functioning.	Seizures. Most people who have Rett syndrome experience seizures at some time during their lives.	Abnormal curvature of the spine (scoliosis). Scoliosis is common with Rett syndrome. It typically begins between 8 and 11 years of age and increases with age. Surgery may be required if the curvature is severe.	Irregular heartbeat. This is a life-threatening problem for many children and adults with Rett syndrome and can result in sudden death.	Pain. Because of health problems, people with Rett syndrome may have an increased risk of pain. But communication problems may prevent others from recognizing these pain issues. In one small study, one-fourth of the parents estimated that their daughters have more than a week of pain each month.	Other symptoms. A variety of other symptoms can occur, such as thin, fragile bones prone to factures; small hands and feet that are usually cold; problems with chewing and swallowing; and teeth grinding. Symptoms can vary greatly from child to child.	|
Reye's syndrome|Diarrhea	Rapid breathing	|
Rhabdomyosarcoma|Head and neck	Bladder	Vagina	Prostate	Testes	Arms	Legs	|Head and neck	Bladder	Vagina	Prostate	Testes	Arms	Legs	
Rheumatic fever|Fever	Painful and tender joints — most often the ankles, knees, elbows or wrists; less often the shoulders, hips, hands and feet	Pain in one joint that migrates to another joint	Red, hot or swollen joints	Small, painless nodules beneath the skin	Chest pain	Heart murmur	Fatigue	Flat or slightly raised, painless rash with a ragged edge (erythema marginatum)	Jerky, uncontrollable body movements (Sydenham chorea or St. Vitus' dance) — most often in the hands, feet and face	Outbursts of unusual behavior, such as crying or inappropriate laughing, that accompanies Sydenham chorea 	|Treatments and drugs	Prevention	
Rheumatoid arthritis|Tender, warm, swollen joints	Morning stiffness that may last for hours	Firm bumps of tissue under the skin on your arms (rheumatoid nodules)	Fatigue, fever and weight loss	|Exercise regularly. Gentle exercise can help strengthen the muscles around your joints, and it can help fight fatigue you might feel. Check with your doctor before you start exercising. If you're just getting started, begin by taking a walk. Try swimming or gentle water aerobics. Avoid exercising tender, injured or severely inflamed joints.	Apply heat or cold. Heat can help ease your pain and relax tense, painful muscles. Cold may dull the sensation of pain. Cold also has a numbing effect and decreases muscle spasms.	Relax. Find ways to cope with pain by reducing stress in your life. Techniques such as guided imagery, distraction and muscle relaxation can all be used to control pain.	
Rickets|Delayed growth 	Pain in the spine, pelvis and legs 	Muscle weakness 	|
Ringworm (body)||Tests and diagnosis	Prevention	
Ringworm (scalp)|One or more round patches of scaly skin where the hair has broken off at or just above the scalp	Patches that slowly expand or enlarge	Scaly, gray or reddened areas	Patches that have small black dots where the hair has broken off at the scalp	Brittle or fragile hair that easily pulls out	Tender or painful areas on the scalp	|
Rocky Mountain spotted fever|High fever	Chills	Severe headache	Muscle aches	Nausea and vomiting	Restlessness and insomnia	|
Rosacea|Facial redness. Rosacea usually causes a persistent redness in the central portion of your face. Small blood vessels on your nose and cheeks often swell and become visible. 	Swollen red bumps. Many people who have rosacea also develop bumps on their face that resemble acne. These bumps sometimes contain pus. Your skin may feel hot and tender. 	Eye problems. About half of the people who have rosacea also experience eye dryness, irritation and swollen, reddened eyelids. In some people, rosacea's eye symptoms precede the skin symptoms. 	Enlarged nose. Rarely, rosacea can thicken the skin on the nose, causing the nose to appear bulbous (rhinophyma). This occurs more often in men than in women. 	|Wear broad-spectrum sunscreen with an SPF of 30 or higher 	Protect your face in the winter with a scarf or ski mask 	Avoid irritating your facial skin by rubbing or touching it too much 	Wash problem areas with a gentle cleanser (Dove, Cetaphil) 	Avoid facial products that contain alcohol or other skin irritants 	
Roseola|Fever. Roseola typically starts with a sudden, high fever — often greater than 103 F (39.4 C). Some children may also have a slightly sore throat, runny nose or cough along with or preceding the fever. Your child may also develop swollen lymph nodes in his or her neck along with the fever. The fever lasts three to five days.	Rash. Once the fever subsides, a rash typically appears — but not always. The rash consists of many small pink spots or patches. These spots are generally flat, but some may be raised. There may be a white ring around some of the spots. The rash usually starts on the chest, back and abdomen and then spreads to the neck and arms. It may or may not reach the legs and face. The rash, which isn't itchy or uncomfortable, can last from several hours to several days before fading.	|Plenty of rest. Let your child rest in bed until the fever disappears.	Plenty of fluids. Encourage your child to drink clear fluids, such as water, ginger ale, lemon-lime soda, clear broth, or an electrolyte rehydration solution (Pedialyte, others) or sports drinks, such as Gatorade or Powerade, to prevent dehydration. Remove the gas bubbles from carbonated fluids. You can do this by letting the carbonated beverage stand or by shaking, pouring or stirring the beverage. Removing the carbonation will mean having your child avoid the added discomfort of excess burping or intestinal gas that carbonated beverages may cause.	Sponge baths. A lukewarm sponge bath or a cool washcloth applied to your child's head can soothe the discomfort of a fever. However, avoid using ice, cold water, fans or cold baths. These may give the child unwanted chills.	
Rubella|Mild fever of 102 F (38.9 C) or lower	Headache	Stuffy or runny nose	Inflamed, red eyes	Enlarged, tender lymph nodes at the base of the skull, the back of the neck and behind the ears	A fine, pink rash that begins on the face and quickly spreads to the trunk and then the arms and legs, before disappearing in the same sequence	Aching joints, especially in young women	|Rest in bed as necessary.	Take acetaminophen (Tylenol, others) to relieve discomfort from fever and aches.	Tell friends, family and co-workers — especially pregnant women — about your diagnosis if they may have been exposed to the disease.	Avoid people who have conditions that cause deficient or suppressed immune systems.	Tell your child's school or child care provider that your child has rubella.	
Ruptured eardrum|Ear pain that may subside quickly	Clear, pus-filled or bloody drainage from your ear	Hearing loss	Ringing in your ear (tinnitus)	Spinning sensation (vertigo)	Nausea or vomiting that can result from vertigo	|Keep your ear dry. Place a waterproof silicone earplug or cotton ball coated with petroleum jelly in your ear when showering or bathing.	Refrain from cleaning your ears. Give your eardrum time to heal completely.	Avoid blowing your nose. The pressure created when blowing your nose can damage your healing eardrum.	
Ruptured spleen|Pain in the upper left portion of the abdomen 	Tenderness when you touch the upper left portion of the abdomen 	Lightheadedness 	Confusion 	|
Seasonal affective disorder (SAD)|Feeling depressed most of the day, nearly every day	Feeling hopeless or worthless	Having low energy	Losing interest in activities you once enjoyed	Having problems with sleeping	Experiencing changes in your appetite or weight	Feeling sluggish or agitated	Having difficulty concentrating	Having frequent thoughts of death or suicide	|Make your environment sunnier and brighter. Open blinds, trim tree branches that block sunlight or add skylights to your home. Sit closer to bright windows while at home or in the office.	Get outside. Take a long walk, eat lunch at a nearby park, or simply sit on a bench and soak up the sun. Even on cold or cloudy days, outdoor light can help — especially if you spend some time outside within two hours of getting up in the morning.	Exercise regularly. Exercise and other types of physical activity help relieve stress and anxiety, both of which can increase SAD symptoms. Being more fit can make you feel better about yourself, too, which can lift your mood.	
Salivary gland cancer|A lump or swelling on or near your jaw or in your neck or mouth	Numbness in part of your face	Muscle weakness on one side of your face	Persistent pain in the area of a salivary gland	Difficulty swallowing	Trouble opening your mouth widely	|Brush your teeth several times each day. Use a soft-bristled toothbrush and gently brush your teeth several times each day. Tell your doctor if your mouth becomes too sensitive to tolerate gentle brushing.	Rinse your mouth with warm salt water after meals. Make a mild solution of warm water and salt. Rinse your mouth with this solution after each meal.	Keep your mouth moistened with water or sugarless candies. Drink water throughout the day to keep your mouth moistened. Also try sugarless gum or sugarless candies to stimulate your mouth to produce saliva.	Choose moist foods. Avoid dry foods. Moisten dry food with sauce, gravy, broth, butter or milk.	Avoid acidic or spicy foods and drinks. Choose foods and drinks that won't irritate your mouth. Avoid caffeinated and alcoholic beverages.	
Salmonella infection|Nausea	Vomiting	Abdominal cramps	Diarrhea	Fever	Chills	Headache	Blood in the stool	|Treatments and drugs	Prevention	
Soft tissue sarcoma|A noticeable lump or swelling	Pain, if a tumor presses on nerves or muscles	|
Scabies|Itching, often severe and usually worse at night	Thin, irregular burrow tracks made up of tiny blisters or bumps on your skin	|Cool and soak your skin. Soaking in cool water or applying a cool, wet washcloth to irritated areas of your skin may minimize itching.	Apply soothing lotion. Calamine lotion, available without a prescription, can effectively relieve the pain and itching of minor skin irritations.	Take antihistamines. At your doctor's suggestion, you may find that over-the-counter antihistamines relieve the allergic symptoms caused by scabies.	
Spontaneous coronary artery dissection (SCAD)|Chest pain	A rapid heartbeat or fluttery feeling in the chest	Pain in your arms, shoulders or jaw	Shortness of breath	Sweating	Unusual, extreme tiredness	Nausea	Dizziness	|
Scarlet fever|Red rash. The rash looks like a sunburn and feels like sandpaper. It typically begins on the face or neck and spreads to the trunk, arms and legs. If pressure is applied to the reddened skin, it will turn pale.	Red lines. The folds of skin around the groin, armpits, elbows, knees and neck usually become a deeper red than the surrounding rash.	Flushed face. The face may appear flushed with a pale ring around the mouth.	Strawberry tongue. The tongue generally looks red and bumpy, and it's often covered with a white coating early in the disease.	|Treat fever and pain. Use ibuprofen (Advil, Children's Motrin, others) or acetaminophen (Tylenol, others) to control the fever and minimize throat pain. 	Provide adequate fluids. Give your child plenty of water to keep the throat moist and prevent dehydration.	Prepare a saltwater gargle. If your child is able to gargle water, give him or her salty water to gargle and then spit out. This may ease the throat pain.	Humidify the air. Use a cool mist humidifier to eliminate dry air that may further irritate a sore throat.	Offer lozenges. Children older than age 4 can suck on lozenges to relieve a sore throat.	Provide comforting foods. Warm liquids such as soup and cold treats like ice pops can soothe a sore throat.	Avoid irritants. Keep your home free from cigarette smoke and cleaning products that can irritate the throat.	
Schizoaffective disorder|Delusions — having false, fixed beliefs	Hallucinations, such as hearing voices	Major depressed mood episodes	Possible periods of manic mood or a sudden increase in energy and behavioral displays that are out of character	Impaired occupational and social functioning	Problems with cleanliness and physical appearance	Paranoid thoughts and ideas	|
Schizoid personality disorder|Prefer being alone and usually choose solitary activities 	Prize independence and have few close friendships 	Feel confused about how to respond to normal social cues and generally have little to say 	Feel little if any desire for sexual relationships 	Feel unable to experience pleasure 	Come off as dull, indifferent or emotionally cold 	Feel unmotivated and tend to underperform at school or work 	|
Schizophrenia|Delusions. These are false beliefs that are not based in reality. For example, you're being harmed or harassed; certain gestures or comments are directed at you; you have exceptional ability or fame; another person is in love with you; a major catastrophe is about to occur; or your body is not functioning properly. Delusions occur in as many as 4 out of 5 people with schizophrenia. 	Hallucinations. These usually involve seeing or hearing things that don't exist. Yet for the person with schizophrenia, they have the full force and impact of a normal experience. Hallucinations can be in any of the senses, but hearing voices is the most common hallucination. 	Disorganized thinking (speech). Disorganized thinking is inferred from disorganized speech. Effective communication can be impaired, and answers to questions may be partially or completely unrelated. Rarely, speech may include putting together meaningless words that can't be understood, sometimes known as word salad. 	Extremely disorganized or abnormal motor behavior. This may show in a number of ways, ranging from childlike silliness to unpredictable agitation. Behavior is not focused on a goal, which makes it hard to perform tasks. Abnormal motor behavior can include resistance to instructions, inappropriate and bizarre posture, a complete lack of response, or useless and excessive movement. 	Negative symptoms. This refers to reduced ability or lack of ability to function normally. For example, the person appears to lack emotion, such as not making eye contact, not changing facial expressions, speaking without inflection or monotone, or not adding hand or head movements that normally provide the emotional emphasis in speech. Also, the person may have a reduced ability to plan or carry out activities, such as decreased talking and neglect of personal hygiene, or have a loss of interest in everyday activities, social withdrawal or a lack of ability to experience pleasure. 	|
Schizotypal personality disorder|Being a loner and lacking close friends outside of the immediate family 	Incorrect interpretation of events, including feeling that external events have personal meaning 	Peculiar, eccentric or unusual thinking, beliefs or behavior 	Dressing in peculiar ways 	Belief in special powers, such as telepathy 	Perceptual alterations, in some cases bodily illusions, including phantom pains or other distortions in the sense of touch 	Persistent and excessive social anxiety 	Peculiar style of speech, such as loose or vague patterns of speaking or rambling oddly and endlessly during conversations 	Suspicious or paranoid ideas, hypersensitivity, and constant doubts about the loyalty and fidelity of others 	Flat emotions, or limited or inappropriate emotional responses 	|
Sciatica|You have sudden, severe pain in your low back or leg and numbness or muscle weakness in your leg	The pain follows a violent injury, such as a traffic accident	You have trouble controlling your bowels or bladder	|Cold packs. Initially, you might get relief from a cold pack placed on the painful area for up to 20 minutes several times a day. Use an ice pack or a package of frozen peas wrapped in a clean towel.	Hot packs. After two to three days, apply heat to the areas that hurt. Use hot packs, a heat lamp or a heating pad on the lowest setting. If you continue to have pain, try alternating warm and cold packs.	Stretching. Stretching exercises for your low back can help you feel better and might help relieve nerve root compression. Avoid jerking, bouncing or twisting during the stretch, and try to hold the stretch for at least 30 seconds.	Over-the-counter medications. Pain relievers such as ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin IB, others) and naproxen sodium (Aleve) are sometimes helpful for sciatica.	
Scleroderma|Skin. Nearly everyone who has scleroderma experiences a hardening and tightening of patches of skin. These patches may be shaped like ovals or straight lines. The number, location and size of the patches vary by type of scleroderma. Skin can appear shiny because it's so tight, and movement of the affected area may be restricted. 	Fingers or toes. One of the earliest signs of scleroderma is an exaggerated response to cold temperatures or emotional distress, which can cause numbness, pain or color changes in the fingers or toes. Called Raynaud's phenomenon, this condition also occurs in people who don't have scleroderma. 	Digestive system. In addition to acid reflux, which can damage the section of esophagus nearest the stomach, some people with scleroderma may also have problems absorbing nutrients if their intestinal muscles aren't moving food properly through the intestines. 	Heart, lungs or kidneys. Rarely, scleroderma can affect the function of the heart, lungs or kidneys. These problems can become life-threatening. 	|Stay active. Exercise keeps your body flexible, improves circulation and relieves stiffness. Range-of-motion exercises can help keep your skin and joints flexible. 	Don't smoke. Nicotine causes blood vessels to contract, making Raynaud's phenomenon worse. Smoking can also cause permanent narrowing of your blood vessels. Quitting smoking is difficult — ask your doctor for help. 	Manage heartburn. Avoid foods that give you heartburn or gas. Also avoid late-night meals. Elevate the head of your bed to keep stomach acid from backing up into your esophagus (reflux) as you sleep. Antacids may help relieve symptoms. 	Protect yourself from the cold. Wear warm mittens for protection anytime your hands are exposed to cold — even when you reach into a freezer. When you're outside in the cold, cover your face and head and wear layers of warm clothing. 	
Scoliosis|Uneven shoulders 	One shoulder blade that appears more prominent than the other 	Uneven waist 	One hip higher than the other 	|Treatments and drugs	Alternative medicine	
Scorpion stings|Pain, which can be intense	Numbness and tingling in the area around the sting	Slight swelling in the area around the sting	|Clean the wound with soap and water.	Apply cold compresses to the affected area to ease the pain and slow the venom's spread. This is most effective in the first two hours after a sting occurs.	Keep the affected limb raised to the level of your heart.	Try to stay calm and quiet so that the poison spreads more slowly.	Don't consume food or liquids if you're having difficulty swallowing.	Over-the-counter pain relievers, such as ibuprofen (Motrin IB, Chlidren's Motrin, others), can help ease discomfort. But avoid using narcotic pain medications, which can suppress breathing.	
Scrotal masses|An unusual lump	Sudden pain	A dull aching pain or feeling of heaviness in the scrotum	Pain that radiates throughout the groin, abdomen or lower back	Tender, swollen or hardened testicle	Tender, swollen or hardened epididymis (ep-ih-DID-uh-mis), the soft, comma-shaped tube above and behind the testicle that stores and transports sperm	Swelling in the scrotum	Redness of the skin of the scrotum	Nausea or vomiting	|Examine your testicles once a month, especially if you've had testicular cancer or you have a family history of testicular cancer.	Perform the exam after a warm bath or shower. The heat from the water relaxes your scrotum, making it easier for you to check.	Stand in front of a mirror. Look for swelling on the skin of the scrotum.	Cup your scrotum with one hand to see if it feels different from normal.	Examine one testicle at a time using both hands. Place the index and middle fingers under the testicle; place your thumbs on top.	Gently roll the testicle between the thumbs and fingers to feel for lumps. The testicles are usually smooth, oval shaped and somewhat firm. It's normal for one testicle to be slightly larger than the other.	Feel along the soft, comma-shaped structure that runs above and behind the testicle (epididymis) to check for swelling.	
Seborrheic dermatitis|Skin flakes (dandruff) on your scalp, hair, eyebrows, beard or mustache	Patches of greasy skin covered with flaky white or yellow scales or crust on the scalp, ears, face, chest, armpits, scrotum or other parts of the body	Red skin	Redness or crusting of the eyelids (blepharitis)	Possibly itching or stinging	|Shampoo with pyrithione zinc (Head & Shoulders) or selenium (Selsun Blue), used daily	Shampoo with the antifungal ketoconazole, used twice weekly, alternating with your daily shampoo	Tar shampoo (Neutrogena T/Gel, DHS Tar)	Salicylic acid shampoo (Neutrogena T/Sal), used daily	
Seborrheic keratosis|Ranges in color, usually from light tan to brown or black	Is round or oval shaped	Has a characteristic "pasted on" look	Is flat or slightly elevated with a scaly surface	Ranges in size from very small to more than 1 inch (2.5 centimeters) across	May itch	|
Separated shoulder|Shoulder pain	Shoulder or arm weakness	Shoulder bruising or swelling	Limited shoulder movement	A bump at the top of your shoulder	|
Separation anxiety|Recurrent and excessive distress about being away from home or parents	Constant, excessive worry about losing a parent to an illness or a disaster	Constant worry that something bad will happen, such as being lost or kidnapped, causing separation from parents	Refusing to be away from home because of fear of separation	Not wanting to be alone and without a parent in the house	Repeated nightmares about separation	Frequent complaints of headaches, stomachaches or other symptoms when separation from a parent is anticipated	|Practice goodbyes. Leave your child with a trusted caregiver for short periods of time. Eventually your child will learn that he or she can count on you to return.	Time your departure carefully. Your child may be more likely to get upset when you leave if he or she is tired, hungry or restless. If you can, leave when your child is fed and rested.	Give your child something to look forward to. Talk about something fun that will happen while you're gone.	Don't prolong your goodbye. If you're leaving your child at home or in another familiar environment, give your child a gentle goodbye — then go. Encourage your child's caregiver to distract your child with a favorite toy or engage your child in a new activity right away. If you're leaving your child in a new environment, you might play with your child for a few minutes to ease the transition. When you leave, remind your child that you'll be back. Be specific about when you'll return, such as "after lunch" or "after your nap."	Leave a reminder. Offer a special blanket, stuffed animal or other comforting object for your child to hold while you're gone. This can be part of the routine for separating.	Keep the tears in perspective. Your child's tears are an attempt to keep you from leaving. When you're gone, the tears aren't likely to last long — especially once your child is engaged in a new activity.	
Serotonin syndrome|Agitation or restlessness	Confusion	Rapid heart rate and high blood pressure	Dilated pupils	Loss of muscle coordination or twitching muscles	Muscle rigidity	Heavy sweating	Diarrhea	Headache	Shivering	Goose bumps	|
Severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS)|Fever of 100.5 F (38 C) or higher	Dry cough	Shortness of breath	|
Sex headaches|A dull ache in the head and neck that intensifies as sexual excitement increases	A sudden, severe, throbbing headache that occurs just before or at the moment of orgasm	|
Shaken baby syndrome|Extreme irritability	Difficulty staying awake	Breathing problems	Poor eating	Tremors	Vomiting	Pale or bluish skin	Seizures	Paralysis	Coma	|
Sheehan's syndrome|Difficulty breast-feeding or an inability to breast-feed	No menstrual periods (amenorrhea) or infrequent menstruation (oligomenorrhea)	Loss of pubic or underarm hair	Slowed mental function, weight gain and difficulty staying warm as a result of an underactive thyroid (hypothyroidism)	Low blood pressure	Fatigue	Irregular heartbeat	Loss of interest in sex	|
Shellfish allergy|Hives, itching or eczema (atopic dermatitis)	Swelling of the lips, face, tongue and throat, or other parts of the body	Wheezing, nasal congestion or trouble breathing	Abdominal pain, diarrhea, nausea or vomiting	Dizziness, lightheadedness or fainting	Tingling in the mouth	|
Shigella infection|Diarrhea (often containing blood or mucus)	Abdominal pain or cramps	Fever	|
Shin splints|Tenderness, soreness or pain along the inner part of your lower leg	Mild swelling in your lower leg	|
Shingles|Pain, burning, numbness or tingling	Sensitivity to touch	A red rash that begins a few days after the pain	Fluid-filled blisters that break open and crust over	Itching	|Treatments and drugs	Prevention	
Short bowel syndrome|Portions of the small intestine have been surgically removed. Conditions that may require surgical removal of large portions of the small intestine include Crohn's disease, cancer, traumatic injuries and blood clots in the arteries that provide blood to the intestines.	Portions of the small intestine are missing or damaged at birth. Babies may be born with a short small intestine or with a damaged small intestine that must be surgically removed.	|Portions of the small intestine have been surgically removed. Conditions that may require surgical removal of large portions of the small intestine include Crohn's disease, cancer, traumatic injuries and blood clots in the arteries that provide blood to the intestines.	Portions of the small intestine are missing or damaged at birth. Babies may be born with a short small intestine or with a damaged small intestine that must be surgically removed.	
Sick sinus syndrome|Slower than normal pulse (bradycardia)	Fatigue	Dizziness or lightheadedness	Fainting or near fainting	Shortness of breath	Chest pains	A sensation of rapid, fluttering heartbeats (palpitations)	|Exercise and eat a healthy diet. Live a heart-healthy lifestyle by exercising regularly and eating a healthy, low-fat diet that's rich in fruits, vegetables and whole grains.	Maintain a healthy weight. Being overweight increases your risk of developing heart disease.	Keep blood pressure and cholesterol under control. Make lifestyle changes and take medications as prescribed to correct high blood pressure (hypertension) or high cholesterol.	Don't smoke. If you smoke and can't quit on your own, talk to your doctor about strategies or programs to help you break a smoking habit.	If you drink, do so in moderation. If you drink alcohol, drink in moderation. For some conditions it's recommended that you completely avoid alcohol. Ask your doctor for advice specific to your condition. If you can't control your alcohol use, talk to your doctor about a program to quit drinking and manage other behaviors related to alcohol abuse.	Don't use illegal drugs. Talk to your doctor about an appropriate program for you if you need help ending illegal drug use.	Control stress. Avoid unnecessary stress and learn coping techniques to handle normal stress in a healthy way.	Go to scheduled checkups. Have regular physical exams and report any signs or symptoms to your doctor.	
Sickle cell anemia|Anemia. Sickle cells are fragile. They break apart easily and die, leaving you without a good supply of red blood cells. Red blood cells usually live for about 120 days before they die and need to be replaced. But sickle cells die after an average of less than 20 days. This results in a lasting shortage of red blood cells (anemia). Without enough red blood cells in circulation, your body can't get the oxygen it needs to feel energized. That's why anemia causes fatigue.	Episodes of pain. Periodic episodes of pain, called crises, are a major symptom of sickle cell anemia. Pain develops when sickle-shaped red blood cells block blood flow through tiny blood vessels to your chest, abdomen and joints. Pain can also occur in your bones. The pain may vary in intensity and can last for a few hours to a few weeks. Some people experience only a few episodes of pain. Others experience a dozen or more crises a year. If a crisis is severe enough, you may need to be hospitalized.	Hand-foot syndrome. Swollen hands and feet may be the first signs of sickle cell anemia in babies. The swelling is caused by sickle-shaped red blood cells blocking blood flow out of their hands and feet.	Frequent infections. Sickle cells can damage your spleen, an organ that fights infection. This may make you more vulnerable to infections. Doctors commonly give infants and children with sickle cell anemia vaccinations and antibiotics to prevent potentially life-threatening infections, such as pneumonia.	Delayed growth. Red blood cells provide your body with the oxygen and nutrients you need for growth. A shortage of healthy red blood cells can slow growth in infants and children and delay puberty in teenagers.	Vision problems. Some people with sickle cell anemia experience vision problems. Tiny blood vessels that supply your eyes may become plugged with sickle cells. This can damage the retina — the portion of the eye that processes visual images.	|Take folic acid supplements daily, and choose a healthy diet. Bone marrow needs folic acid and other vitamins to make new red blood cells. Your doctor may recommend a folic acid supplement. You can increase the number of vitamins you eat each day by choosing a diet that focuses on a variety of colorful fruits and vegetables, as well as whole grains.	Drink plenty of water. Dehydration can increase your risk of a sickle cell crisis. Drink water throughout your day, aiming for about eight glasses a day. Increase the amount of water you drink if you exercise or spend time in a hot, dry climate.	Avoid temperature extremes. Exposure to extreme heat or cold can increase your risk of a sickle cell crisis.	Exercise regularly, but don't overdo it. Talk with your doctor about how much exercise is right for you.	Use over-the-counter medications with caution. Some medications, such as the decongestant pseudoephedrine, can constrict your blood vessels and make it harder for the sickle cells to move through freely.	Fly on airplanes with pressurized cabins. Unpressurized aircraft cabins may not provide enough oxygen. Low oxygen levels can trigger a sickle crisis.	Plan ahead when traveling to high-altitude areas. There is less oxygen at higher altitudes, so you may require supplemental oxygen to avoid triggering a sickle cell crisis. Meet with your doctor before your trip to discuss the risks of traveling to a high-altitude area.	
Sinus headaches|Pain, pressure and fullness in your cheeks, brow or forehead	Worsening pain if you bend forward or lie down	Stuffy nose	Fatigue	Achy feeling in your upper teeth	|
Sjogren's syndrome|Dry eyes. Your eyes may burn, itch or feel gritty — as if there's sand in them.	Dry mouth. Your mouth may feel like it's full of cotton, making it difficult to swallow or speak.	|Use artificial tears, an eye lubricant or both. Artificial tears (in eyedrop form) and eye lubricants (in eyedrop, gel or ointment form) help relieve the discomfort of dry eyes. You don't have to apply eye lubricants as often as artificial tears. Because of their thicker consistency, though, eye lubricants can blur your vision and collect on your eyelashes. Your doctor may recommend artificial tears without preservatives because the preservatives can be irritating for people with dry eye syndrome.	Increase humidity. Increasing the indoor humidity and reducing your exposure to blowing air may help keep your eyes from getting uncomfortably dry. For example, avoid sitting in front of a fan or air conditioning vent, and wear goggles or protective eyewear when you go outdoors.	
Skin cancer|A pearly or waxy bump	A flat, flesh-colored or brown scar-like lesion	|
Sleep apnea|Loud snoring, which is usually more prominent in obstructive sleep apnea	Episodes of breathing cessation during sleep witnessed by another person	Abrupt awakenings accompanied by shortness of breath, which more likely indicates central sleep apnea	Awakening with a dry mouth or sore throat	Morning headache	Difficulty staying asleep (insomnia)	Excessive daytime sleepiness (hypersomnia)	Attention problems	Irritability	|Lose excess weight. Even a slight loss in excess weight may help relieve constriction of your throat. Sleep apnea may go into complete remission in some cases if you return to a healthy weight. But sleep apnea will likely come back if you regain the weight.	Exercise. Regular exercise can help ease the symptoms of obstructive sleep apnea even without weight loss. A good goal is to try to get 30 minutes of moderate activity, such as a brisk walk, most days of the week.	Avoid alcohol and certain medications such as tranquilizers and sleeping pills. These relax the muscles in the back of your throat, interfering with breathing.	Sleep on your side or abdomen rather than on your back. Sleeping on your back can cause your tongue and soft palate to rest against the back of your throat and block your airway. To prevent sleeping on your back, try sewing a tennis ball in the back of your pajama top.	Keep your nasal passages open at night. Use a saline nasal spray to help keep your nasal passages open. Talk to your doctor about using any nasal decongestants or antihistamines because these medications are generally recommended only for short-term use.	Stop smoking, if you're a smoker. Smoking worsens obstructive sleep apnea.	
Sleep apnea, central|Observed episodes of stopped breathing or abnormal breathing patterns during sleep	Abrupt awakenings accompanied by shortness of breath	Shortness of breath that's relieved by sitting up	Difficulty staying asleep (insomnia)	Excessive daytime sleepiness (hypersomnia)	Difficulty concentrating	Mood changes	Morning headaches	Snoring	|
Sleep apnea, obstructive|Excessive daytime sleepiness	Loud snoring	Observed episodes of breathing cessation during sleep	Abrupt awakenings accompanied by shortness of breath	Awakening with a dry mouth or sore throat	Awakening with chest pain	Morning headache	Difficulty concentrating during the day	Experiencing mood changes, such as depression or irritability	Difficulty staying asleep (insomnia)	Having high blood pressure	|Lose weight. If you're overweight or obese, even a slight loss of excess weight may help relieve constriction of your airway. Losing weight can also improve your health and quality of life, and may reduce your sleepiness during the day.	Exercise. Exercising, such as aerobic exercise and strength training, can help improve your condition. Aim to exercise about 150 minutes per week, and generally try to exercise four or more days per week.	Avoid alcohol and medications such as tranquilizers and sleeping pills. Alcohol can worsen obstructive sleep apnea and sleepiness and may lead to you gaining weight. Certain medications also can worsen your sleep.	Sleep on your side or abdomen rather than on your back. Sleeping on your back can cause your tongue and soft palate to rest against the back of your throat and block your airway. To prevent sleeping on your back, try sewing a tennis ball in the back of your pajama top.	Keep your nasal passages open while you sleep. If you have congestion, use a saline nasal spray to help keep your nasal passages open. Talk to your doctor about using nasal decongestants or antihistamines, because some medications may only be recommended for short-term use.	
Sleep terrors (night terrors)|Sit up in bed	Scream or shout	Kick and thrash	Sweat, breathe heavily and have a racing pulse	Be hard to awaken, but if awakened be confused	Be inconsolable	Stare wide-eyed	Get out of bed and run around the house	Engage in aggressive behavior (more common in adults)	|Make the environment safe. To help prevent injury, close and lock all windows and exterior doors at night. You might even lock interior doors or place alarms or bells on the doors. Block doorways or stairways with a gate, and move electrical cords or other objects that pose a tripping hazard. Avoid using bunk beds. Place any sharp or fragile objects out of reach, and lock up all weapons.	Get more sleep. Fatigue can contribute to sleep terrors. If you are sleep deprived, try an earlier bedtime and a more regular sleep schedule. Sometimes a short nap may help.	Establish a regular, relaxing routine before bedtime. Do quiet, calming activities — such as reading books, doing puzzles or soaking in a warm bath — before bed. Meditation or relaxation exercises may help, too.	Put stress in its place. Identify the things that stress you out, and brainstorm possible ways to handle the stress. If your child seems anxious or stressed, talk about what's bothering him or her.	Look for a pattern. If your child has sleep terrors, keep a sleep diary. For several nights, note how many minutes after bedtime a sleep terror episode occurs. If the timing is fairly consistent, wake your child about 15 minutes before you expect a sleep terror episode. Keep your child awake for five minutes, and then let him or her fall asleep again.	
Sleepwalking|Get out of bed and walk around	Sit up in bed and open his or her eyes	Have a glazed, glassy-eyed expression	Do routine activities, such as getting dressed, talking or making a snack	Not respond or communicate with others	Be difficult to wake up during an episode	Be disoriented or confused for a short time after being awakened	Quickly return to sleep	Not remember the episode in the morning	Sometimes have problems functioning during the day because of disturbed sleep	Have sleep terrors in addition to sleepwalking	|Make the environment safe for sleepwalking. If sleepwalking has led to injuries or has the potential to do so, consider some of these precautions to prevent injury: Close and lock all windows and exterior doors at night. You might even lock interior doors or place alarms or bells on the doors. Block doorways or stairways with a gate, and move electrical cords or other objects that pose a tripping hazard. Sleep in a ground floor bedroom, if possible. Place any sharp or fragile objects out of reach, and lock up all weapons. If your child sleepwalks, don't let him or her sleep in a bunk bed.	Get more sleep. Fatigue can contribute to sleepwalking. If you're sleep deprived, try an earlier bedtime, a more regular sleep schedule or a short nap, especially for toddlers.	Establish a regular, relaxing routine before bedtime. Do quiet, calming activities before bed, such as reading books, doing puzzles or soaking in a warm bath. Meditation or relaxation exercises may help, too.	Put stress in its place. Identify the issues that cause stress, and brainstorm possible ways to handle the stress. Talk about what's bothering you. Or if your child seems anxious or stressed, talk with him or her about any concerns.	Look for a pattern. For several nights, note â or have another person in your home note â how many minutes after bedtime a sleepwalking episode occurs. If the timing is fairly consistent, this information is useful in planning anticipatory awakenings.	
Small bowel cancer|Adenocarcinoma	Sarcoma, including gastrointestinal stromal tumor	Carcinoid tumors	Lymphoma	|Adenocarcinoma	Sarcoma, including gastrointestinal stromal tumor	Carcinoid tumors	Lymphoma	
Small bowel prolapse (enterocele)|A pulling sensation in your pelvis that eases when you lie down	A feeling of pelvic fullness, pressure or pain	Low back pain that eases when you lie down	A soft bulge of tissue in your vagina	Vaginal discomfort and painful intercourse (dyspareunia)	|Perform Kegel exercises to strengthen pelvic muscles and support weakened vaginal tissues.	Avoid constipation by drinking plenty of fluids and eating high-fiber foods, such as whole grains, and fresh fruits and vegetables.	Avoid heavy lifting.	Try to control coughing.	Lose weight if you're overweight or obese.	Avoid bearing down to move your bowels. Rely on your natural colorectal function to empty your lower bowel.	
Small vessel disease|Chest pain, squeezing or discomfort	Chest pain associated with discomfort in your left arm or jaw	Chest pain that worsens with daily activities and at times of emotional stress	Neck, shoulder, upper back or abdominal discomfort	Shortness of breath	Unusual fatigue	A loss of energy	Trouble sleeping	|
Smallpox|Fever	Overall discomfort	Headache	Severe fatigue	Severe back pain	Vomiting, possibly	|
Snoring|Noise during sleep	Excessive daytime sleepiness	Difficulty concentrating	Morning headaches	Sore throat	Restless sleep	Gasping or choking at night	High blood pressure	Chest pain at night	Your snoring is so loud it's disrupting your partner's sleep	You wake up choking or gasping	|If you're overweight, lose weight. People who are overweight may have extra tissues in the throat that contribute to snoring. Losing weight can help reduce snoring.	Sleep on your side. Lying on your back allows your tongue to fall backward into your throat, narrowing your airway and partially obstructing airflow. Try sleeping on your side. If you find that you always end up on your back in the middle of the night, try sewing a tennis ball in the back of your pajama top.	Raise the head of your bed. Raising the head of your bed by about 4 inches may help.	Nasal strips or an external nasal dilator. Adhesive strips applied to the bridge of the nose help many people increase the area of their nasal passage, enhancing their breathing. A nasal dilator is a stiffened adhesive strip applied externally across the nostrils that may help decrease airflow resistance so you breathe easier. Nasal strips and external nasal dilators aren't effective for people with sleep apnea, however.	 Treat nasal congestion or obstruction. Having allergies or a deviated septum can limit airflow through your nose. This forces you to breathe through your mouth, increasing the likelihood of snoring. Don't use an oral or spray decongestant for more than three days in a row for acute congestion unless directed to do so by your doctor. Long-term use of these medications can have a rebound effect and make your congestion worse. Ask your doctor about a prescription steroid spray if you have chronic congestion. To correct a structural defect in your airway, such as a deviated septum, you may need surgery. 	Limit or avoid alcohol and sedatives. Avoid drinking alcoholic beverages at least two hours before bedtime, and let your doctor know about your snoring before taking sedatives. Sedatives and alcohol depress your central nervous system, causing excessive relaxation of muscles, including the tissues in your throat.	Quit smoking. Smoking cessation may reduce snoring, in addition to having numerous other health benefits.	Get enough sleep. Adults should aim for at least 7 to 8 hours of sleep per night. The recommended hours of sleep for children vary by age. Preschool-aged children should get 11 to 12 hours a day. School-age children need at least 10 hours a day, and teens should have nine to 10 hours a day.	
Social anxiety disorder|Fear of situations in which you may be judged	Worrying about embarrassing or humiliating yourself	Concern that you'll offend someone	Intense fear of interacting or talking with strangers	Fear that others will notice that you look anxious	Fear of physical symptoms that may cause you embarrassment, such as blushing, sweating, trembling or having a shaky voice	Avoiding doing things or speaking to people out of fear of embarrassment	Avoiding situations where you might be the center of attention	Having anxiety in anticipation of a feared activity or event	Spending time after a social situation analyzing your performance and identifying flaws in your interactions	Expecting the worst possible consequences from a negative experience during a social situation	|Reach out to people with whom you feel comfortable	Join a local or Internet-based support group	Get physical exercise or be physically active on a regular basis	Get enough sleep	Eat a healthy, well-balanced diet	Avoid alcohol	Limit or avoid caffeine	
Solitary rectal ulcer syndrome|Constipation	Rectal bleeding	Straining during bowel movements	Pain or a feeling of fullness in your pelvis	A feeling of incomplete passing of stool	Passing mucus from your rectum	Fecal incontinence	Rectal pain	| Increase the amount of fiber in your diet. Fiber adds bulk to your stool. The bulk helps push the contents of your intestines along so that they can be eliminated when you have a bowel movement. Try to eat at least 20 to 35 grams of fiber each day. Nutrition labels on food packaging list the amount of fiber in a serving. The best sources of fiber are fruits, vegetables and whole grains. Eat fruits and vegetables with the skin on, and choose whole fruits and vegetables over juices. Look for breads and cereals that list whole wheat, oats or bran as the first ingredients. 	Try bulk laxatives and stool softeners. Bulk laxatives, such as Metamucil and FiberCon, absorb fluid in the intestines and make stools bulkier, which helps trigger the bowel to contract and push stool out. However, they should be taken with water, or they can cause obstruction. Stool softeners help mix fluid into stools, making them easier to pass.	Drink water throughout the day. Drinking enough water and other fluids helps to keep your bowel movements soft and easy to pass. For variety, you may want to add lemon juice to water for flavor. Or try other noncarbonated and caffeine-free beverages. Prune juice can be helpful because it has a natural laxative effect.	
Somatic symptom disorder|Specific sensations, such as pain or shortness of breath, or more general symptoms, such as fatigue or weakness	Unrelated to any medical cause that can be identified, or related to a medical condition such as cancer or heart disease, but more significant than what's usually expected	A single symptom, multiple symptoms or varying symptoms	Mild, moderate or severe	|Work with your provider. Work with your doctor and mental health provider to determine a regular schedule for visits to discuss your concerns and build a trusting relationship. Also discuss setting reasonable limits on tests, evaluations and specialist referrals. Avoid seeking advice from multiple doctors or emergency room visits that can make your care more difficult to coordinate and may subject you to duplicate testing.	Practice stress management and relaxation techniques. Learning stress management and relaxation techniques, such as progressive muscle relaxation, may help improve symptoms.	Get physically active. A graduated activity program may have a calming effect on your mood, improve your physical symptoms and help improve your physical function.	Participate in activities. Stay involved in work, social and family activities. Don't wait until your symptoms are resolved to participate.	Avoid alcohol and recreational drugs. Substance use can make your care more difficult. Talk to your health care provider if you need help quitting.	
Sore throat|Pain or a scratchy sensation in the throat 	Pain that worsens with swallowing or talking 	Difficulty swallowing 	Dry throat 	Sore, swollen glands in your neck or jaw 	Swollen, red tonsils 	White patches or pus on your tonsils 	Hoarse or muffled voice 	|Rest. Get plenty of sleep and rest your voice. 	Drink fluids. Drink plenty of water to keep the throat moist and prevent dehydration. 	Try comforting foods and beverage. Warm liquids — broth, caffeine-free tea or warm water with honey — and cold treats such as ice pops can soothe a sore throat. 	Gargle saltwater. A saltwater gargle of 1 teaspoon (5 grams) of table salt to 8 ounces (237 milliliters) of warm water can help soothe a sore throat. Gargle the solution and then spit it out. 	Humidify the air. Use a cool-air humidifier to eliminate dry air that may further irritate a sore throat or sit for several minutes in a steamy bathroom. 	Consider lozenges. Lozenges can soothe a sore throat. Because lozenges are a choking hazard for young children, don't give them to children age 4 and younger. 	Avoid irritants. Keep your home free from cigarette smoke and cleaning products that can irritate the throat. 	Treat pain and fever. Ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin IB, others) or acetaminophen (Tylenol, others) may minimize throat pain. Aspirin has been linked with Reye's syndrome, so use caution when giving aspirin to children or teenagers. Though aspirin is approved for use in children older than age 2, children and teenagers recovering from chickenpox or flu-like symptoms should never take aspirin. Talk to your doctor if you have concerns. 	
Soy allergy|Tingling in the mouth	Hives; itching; or itchy, scaly skin (eczema)	Swelling of lips, face, tongue and throat, or other body parts	Wheezing, runny nose or breathing difficulty	Abdominal pain, diarrhea, nausea or vomiting	Skin redness (flushing)	|Carry injectable epinephrine (EpiPen, Auvi-Q, others) with you always. Make sure you know when and how to use portable epinephrine.	Wear a medical alert bracelet to let others know about your allergy.	
Spermatocele|Pain or discomfort in the affected testicle	A feeling of heaviness in the testicle with the spermatocele	A mass, or fullness, behind and above the testicle	|
Spider bites|Pain. Typically beginning within an hour of being bitten, pain can spread from the bite site into your abdomen, back or chest.	Cramping. Abdominal cramping or rigidity can be so severe that it's sometimes mistaken for appendicitis or a ruptured appendix.	Sweating. Excessive sweating can occur around the bite mark or may involve the entire limb.	|
Spina bifida|An abnormal tuft of hair	A collection of fat	A small dimple or birthmark	|
Spinal arteriovenous malformations|Problems with walking or climbing stairs	Numbness, tingling or sudden pain in your legs	Weakness on one or both sides of your body	|
Spinal cord injury|Complete. If almost all feeling (sensory) and all ability to control movement (motor function) are lost below the spinal cord injury, your injury is called complete.	Incomplete. If you have some motor or sensory function below the affected area, your injury is called incomplete. There are varying degrees of incomplete injury.	|
Spinal headaches|Dull, throbbing pain that varies in intensity from mild to incapacitating	Pain that typically gets worse when you sit up or stand and decreases or goes away when you lie down	|
Spinal stenosis|In the neck (cervical spine). Cervical stenosis can cause numbness, weakness or tingling in a leg, foot, arm or hand. Tingling in the hand is the most common symptom, and many people also report problems with walking and balance. Nerves to the bladder or bowel may be affected, leading to incontinence.	In the lower back (lumbar spine). Compressed nerves in your lumbar spine can cause pain or cramping in your legs when you stand for long periods of time or when you walk. The discomfort usually eases when you bend forward or sit down.	|Pain relievers. Over-the-counter medications such as ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin IB, others) and naproxen (Aleve) can help reduce pain and inflammation.	Hot or cold packs. Some symptoms of cervical spinal stenosis may be relieved by applying heat or ice to your neck.	Diet and nutrition. Losing excess weight can reduce load-bearing stress on the lumbar spine.	Canes or walkers. In addition to providing stability, these assistive devices can help relieve pain by allowing you to bend forward while walking.	
Sprained ankle|Pain, especially when you bear weight on the affected foot	Swelling and, sometimes, bruising	Restricted range of motion	|Rest. Avoid activities that cause pain, swelling or discomfort.	Ice. Use an ice pack or slush bath immediately for 15 to 20 minutes and repeat every two to three hours while you're awake. If you have vascular disease, diabetes or decreased sensation, talk with your doctor before applying ice.	Compression. To help stop swelling, compress the ankle with an elastic bandage until the swelling stops. Don't hinder circulation by wrapping too tightly. Begin wrapping at the end farthest from your heart.	Elevation. To reduce swelling, elevate your ankle above the level of your heart, especially at night. Gravity helps reduce swelling by draining excess fluid.	
Sprains and strains|Pain	Swelling	Bruising	Limited ability to move the affected joint	At the time of injury, you may hear or feel a "pop" in your joint	|Rest. Avoid activities that cause pain, swelling or discomfort. But don't avoid all physical activity. Instead, give yourself relative rest. With an ankle sprain, you can usually still exercise other muscles to prevent deconditioning. For example, you could use an exercise bicycle, working both your arms and the uninjured leg while resting the injured ankle on a footrest peg. That way you still exercise three limbs and keep up your cardiovascular conditioning.	Ice. Even if you're seeking medical help, ice the area immediately. Use an ice pack or slush bath of ice and water for 15 to 20 minutes each time and repeat every two to three hours while you're awake for the first few days following the injury. Cold reduces pain, swelling and inflammation in injured muscles, joints and connective tissues. It also may slow bleeding if a tear has occurred. If the iced area turns white, stop treatment immediately. This could indicate frostbite. If you have vascular disease, diabetes or decreased sensation, talk with your doctor before applying ice.	Compression. To help stop swelling, compress the area with an elastic bandage until the swelling stops. Don't wrap it too tightly or you may hinder circulation. Begin wrapping at the end farthest from your heart. Loosen the wrap if the pain increases, the area becomes numb or swelling is occurring below the wrapped area.	Elevation. To reduce swelling, elevate the injured area above the level of your heart, especially at night, which allows gravity to help reduce swelling.	
Squamous cell carcinoma of the skin|A firm, red nodule	A flat sore with a scaly crust	A new sore or raised area on an old scar or ulcer	A rough, scaly patch on your lip that may evolve to an open sore	A red sore or rough patch inside your mouth	A red, raised patch or wart-like sore on or in the anus or on your genitals	|
Stage 4 prostate cancer|Painful urination	Decreased force in the stream of urine	Blood in the semen	Erectile dysfunction	Bone pain	Swelling in the legs	Fatigue	Frequent infections	|
Stuttering|Difficulty starting a word, sentence or phrase	Prolonging a word or sounds within a word	Repetition of a sound, syllable or word	Brief silence for certain syllables or pauses within a word (broken word)	Addition of extra words such as "um" if difficulty moving to the next word is anticipated	Excess tension, tightness or movement of the face or upper body to produce a word	Anxiety about talking	Limited ability to effectively communicate	|
Staph infections| Boils. The most common type of staph infection is the boil, a pocket of pus that develops in a hair follicle or oil gland. The skin over the infected area usually becomes red and swollen. If a boil breaks open, it will probably drain pus. Boils occur most often under the arms or around the groin or buttocks. 	Impetigo. This contagious, often painful rash can be caused by staph bacteria. Impetigo usually features large blisters that may ooze fluid and develop a honey-colored crust.	Cellulitis. Cellulitis — an infection of the deeper layers of skin — causes skin redness and swelling on the surface of your skin. Sores (ulcers) or areas of oozing discharge may develop, too. Cellulitis occurs most often in the lower legs and feet.	Staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome. Toxins produced as a result of a staph infection may lead to staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome. Affecting mostly newborns and children, this condition features fever, a rash and sometimes blisters. When the blisters break, the top layer of skin comes off — leaving a red, raw surface that looks like a burn.	|
Stevens-Johnson syndrome|Facial swelling	Tongue swelling	Hives	Skin pain	A red or purple skin rash that spreads within hours to days	Blisters on your skin and the mucous membranes of your mouth, nose, eyes and genitals	Shedding of your skin	|Know what caused your reaction. If your condition was caused by a medication, learn its name and that of closely related medications.	Inform your health care providers. Tell all your health care providers that you have a history of Stevens-Johnson syndrome. If the reaction was caused by a medication, tell them which one.	Wear a medical information bracelet or necklace. Have information about your condition and what caused it inscribed on a medical information bracelet or necklace. Always wear it.	
Stickler syndrome|Eye problems. In addition to severe nearsightedness, children who have Stickler syndrome often experience cataracts, glaucoma and retinal detachments.	Hearing difficulties. The extent of hearing loss varies among people who have Stickler syndrome. It usually affects the ability to hear high frequencies.	Bone and joint abnormalities. Children who have Stickler syndrome often have overly flexible joints and are more likely to develop abnormal curvatures of the spine, such as scoliosis. Osteoarthritis can begin in adolescence.	|Avoid contact sports. Strenuous physical activity may stress the joints, and contact sports, such as football, may increase the risk of retinal detachment.	Seek educational help. Your child may have difficulty in school due to problems hearing or seeing. Your child's teachers need to be aware of his or her special needs.	
Stomach cancer|Fatigue	Feeling bloated after eating	Feeling full after eating small amounts of food	Heartburn that is severe and persistent	Indigestion that is severe and unrelenting	Nausea that is persistent and unexplained	Stomach pain	Vomiting that is persistent	Weight loss that is unintentional	|
Stomach polyps|Pain or tenderness when you press your abdomen	Nausea	Blood in your stool	Anemia	|
Stress fractures||Rest. Stay off the affected limb as directed by your doctor until you are cleared to bear normal weight.	Ice. To reduce swelling and relieve pain, your doctor may recommend applying ice packs to the injured area as needed — up to three or four times a day for 10 minutes at a time.	Resume activity slowly. When your doctor gives the OK, slowly progress from nonweight-bearing activities — such as swimming — to your usual activities. High-impact activities, such as running, should be resumed on a gradual basis with careful progression of time and distance.	
Stress incontinence|Cough	Sneeze	Laugh	Stand up	Get out of a car	Lift something heavy	Exercise	Have sex	|Shed extra weight. If you're overweight — your body mass index (BMI) is 25 or higher — losing excess pounds can help reduce the overall pressure on your bladder and pelvic floor muscles. Moderate weight loss may markedly improve your stress incontinence. Talk to your doctor for guidance on weight loss.	Add fiber to your diet. If chronic constipation contributes to your urinary incontinence, keeping bowel movements soft and regular reduces the strain placed on your pelvic floor muscles. Try eating high-fiber foods — whole grains, legumes, fruits and vegetables — to relieve and prevent constipation.	Avoid foods and beverages that can irritate your bladder. If you have mixed incontinence and you know that drinking coffee or tea (regular or decaf) tends to make you urinate and leak more frequently, try eliminating that drink, especially on days you really don't want to be bothered by leakage.	Don't smoke. Smoking can lead to a severe chronic cough, which can aggravate the symptoms of stress incontinence. Smoking is also associated with a drop in your oxygen-carrying capacity, a factor thought to increase the risk of an overactive bladder. And smoking is associated with bladder cancer.	
Sty|A red lump on your eyelid that is similar to a boil or a pimple	Eyelid pain	Eyelid swelling	Tearing	|Leave the sty alone. Don't try to pop the sty or squeeze the pus from a sty. Doing so can cause the infection to spread.	Clean your eyelid. Gently wash the affected eyelid with mild soap and water.	Place a warm washcloth over your closed eye. To relieve pain, run warm water over a clean washcloth. Wring out the washcloth and place it over your closed eye. Re-wet the washcloth when it loses heat. Continue this for 5 to 10 minutes. Then gently massage the eyelid. Repeating this two to three times a day may encourage the sty to drain on its own.	Keep your eye clean. Don't wear eye makeup until the sty has healed.	Go without contacts lenses. Contact lenses can be contaminated with bacteria associated with a sty. If you wear contacts, try to go without them until your sty goes away.	
Suicide and suicidal thoughts|Talking about suicide — for example, making statements such as "I'm going to kill myself," "I wish I were dead" or "I wish I hadn't been born"	Getting the means to take your own life, such as buying a gun or stockpiling pills	Withdrawing from social contact and wanting to be left alone	Having mood swings, such as being emotionally high one day and deeply discouraged the next	Being preoccupied with death, dying or violence	Feeling trapped or hopeless about a situation	Increasing use of alcohol or drugs	Changing normal routine, including eating or sleeping patterns	Doing risky or self-destructive things, such as using drugs or driving recklessly	Giving away belongings or getting affairs in order when there's no other logical explanation for doing this	Saying goodbye to people as if they won't be seen again	Developing personality changes or being severely anxious or agitated, particularly when experiencing some of the warning signs listed above	|Avoid drugs and alcohol. Alcohol and street drugs can worsen suicidal thoughts. They can also make you feel less inhibited, which means you're more likely to act on your thoughts.	Form a strong support network. That may include family, friends or members of your church, synagogue or other place of worship. Religious practice has been shown to help reduce the risk of suicide.	Get active. Physical activity and exercise have been shown to reduce depression symptoms. Consider walking, jogging, swimming, gardening or taking up another form of physical activity that you enjoy.	
Sun allergy|Redness	Itching or pain	Tiny bumps that may merge into raised patches	Scaling, crusting or bleeding	Blisters or hives	|Avoid sun exposure. Most sun allergy symptoms improve quickly, within hours to a day or two, when the affected areas are no longer exposed to sunlight.	Stop using medications that make you sensitive to light. If you're taking medications for other conditions, talk with your doctor about whether they may be making your skin more sensitive to the sun.	Apply skin moisturizers. Moisturizing skin lotions can help relieve irritation caused by dry, scaly skin.	Use soothing skin remedies. Home remedies that may help include calamine lotion and aloe vera.	
Sunburn: Soothing solutions|Pinkness or redness	Skin that feels warm or hot to the touch	Pain, tenderness or itching	Swelling	Small fluid-filled blisters, which may break	Headache, fever, chills and fatigue if the sunburn is severe	|Take a pain reliever. Over-the-counter pain relievers, such as ibuprofen and naproxen, may help control pain until redness and soreness subside.	Cool the skin. Apply to the affected skin a cool compress — such as a towel dampened with cool tap water. Or take a cool bath or shower. 	Apply moisturizer, aloe vera lotion or gel, or hydrocortisone cream to the affected skin. A low-dose (0.5 to 1 percent) hydrocortisone cream may decrease pain and swelling and speed healing. 	If blisters form, don't break them. They contain your natural body fluid (serum) and are a protective layer. Also, breaking blisters slows the healing process and increases the risk of infection. If needed, lightly cover blisters with gauze. If blisters break, gently clean the area with mild soap and water, apply an antibacterial cream, and cover with a wet dressing. 	Drink plenty of fluids, especially water. Sun exposure and heat can cause fluid loss through your skin. Drinking helps your body recover. 	Treat peeling skin gently. Within a few days, the affected area may begin to peel. This is simply your body's way of getting rid of the top layer of damaged skin. While your skin is peeling, continue to use moisturizing cream.	Protect your sunburn from further sun exposure. Stay out of the sun or protect yourself from sunlight when you go outside.	 Avoid applying "-caine" products, such as benzocaine. Such creams may irritate the skin or cause an allergic reaction. Benzocaine has been linked to a rare but potentially deadly condition called methemoglobinemia. This condition decreases the amount of oxygen the blood can carry. Don't use benzocaine in children younger than age 2 without supervision from a health care professional. If you're an adult, never use more than the recommended dose and consider talking with your doctor before using it. 	
Suspicious breast lumps|Breast cysts. If you find a breast lump that feels round, smooth and firm, it could be a cyst — a dilated milk duct filled with fluid. A breast cyst can be large or small, and the surrounding breast tissue may be tender. A breast cyst may appear before your menstrual period and get smaller or disappear afterward.	Fibrocystic breast changes. With fibrocystic breast changes, you may feel fullness in your breasts with areas of lumpiness and tenderness. Many women experience fibrocystic breast changes related to their menstrual cycles.	Fibroadenomas. Fibroadenomas are solid, noncancerous breast tumors that are smooth and move easily under your skin when touched. A fibroadenoma may grow larger if you're pregnant or using hormone therapy.	Injuries and infections. A severe injury to your breast tissue or nearby nerves can create a breast lump. Doctors describe this condition as fat necrosis. A collection of infected fluid (abscess) in breast tissue also can cause a breast lump, one that's often associated with localized breast pain.	Breast cancer. A breast lump that's painless, hard, irregularly shaped and different from surrounding breast tissue might be breast cancer. Skin covering the lump may look red, dimpled or pitted like the skin of an orange. Your breast size and shape may change, or you may notice discharge from the nipple.	|Breast cysts. If you find a breast lump that feels round, smooth and firm, it could be a cyst — a dilated milk duct filled with fluid. A breast cyst can be large or small, and the surrounding breast tissue may be tender. A breast cyst may appear before your menstrual period and get smaller or disappear afterward.	Fibrocystic breast changes. With fibrocystic breast changes, you may feel fullness in your breasts with areas of lumpiness and tenderness. Many women experience fibrocystic breast changes related to their menstrual cycles.	Fibroadenomas. Fibroadenomas are solid, noncancerous breast tumors that are smooth and move easily under your skin when touched. A fibroadenoma may grow larger if you're pregnant or using hormone therapy.	Injuries and infections. A severe injury to your breast tissue or nearby nerves can create a breast lump. Doctors describe this condition as fat necrosis. A collection of infected fluid (abscess) in breast tissue also can cause a breast lump, one that's often associated with localized breast pain.	Breast cancer. A breast lump that's painless, hard, irregularly shaped and different from surrounding breast tissue might be breast cancer. Skin covering the lump may look red, dimpled or pitted like the skin of an orange. Your breast size and shape may change, or you may notice discharge from the nipple.	
Sweating and body odor|You suddenly begin to sweat much more or less than usual	Sweating disrupts your daily routine	You experience night sweats for no apparent reason	You notice a change in your body odor	|Bathe daily. Regular bathing, especially with an antibacterial detergent or soap, reduces the growth of bacteria on your skin.	Choose clothing to suit your activity. For daily wear, choose natural fabrics, such as cotton, wool and silk, which allow your skin to breathe. For exercise wear, you might prefer manmade fabrics developed to wick moisture away from your skin.	Apply antiperspirants nightly. At bedtime, apply antiperspirants to palms or soles of the feet. Try perfume-free antiperspirants.	Try relaxation techniques. Consider relaxation techniques such as yoga, meditation or biofeedback. These practices can teach you to control the stress that triggers perspiration.	Change your diet. Caffeinated beverages and spicy or strong-smelling foods may make you sweat more or have stronger body odor than usual. Eliminating these foods may help.	
Swimmer's ear|Itching in your ear canal 	Slight redness inside your ear 	Mild discomfort that's made worse by pulling on your outer ear (pinna, or auricle) or pushing on the little "bump" (tragus) in front of your ear 	Some drainage of clear, odorless fluid 	|
Swimmer's itch||Cover affected areas with a clean, wet washcloth	Soak in a bath sprinkled with Epsom salts, baking soda or oatmeal	Make a paste of baking soda and water, and then apply it to the affected areas	
Swine flu (H1N1 flu)|Fever (but not always)	Cough	Sore throat	Runny or stuffy nose	Watery, red eyes	Body aches	Headache	Fatigue	Diarrhea	Nausea and vomiting	|Drink plenty of liquids. Choose water, juice and warm soups to prevent dehydration.	Rest. Get more sleep to help your immune system fight infection.	 Consider pain relievers. Use an over-the-counter pain reliever, such as acetaminophen (Tylenol, others) or ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin IB, others), cautiously. Also, use caution when giving aspirin to children or teenagers. Though aspirin is approved for use in children older than age 3, children and teenagers recovering from chickenpox or flu-like symptoms should never take aspirin. This is because aspirin has been linked to Reye's syndrome, a rare but potentially life-threatening condition, in such children. Remember, pain relievers may make you more comfortable, but they won't make your symptoms go away faster and may have side effects. Ibuprofen may cause stomach pain, bleeding and ulcers. If taken for a long period or in higher than recommended doses, acetaminophen can be toxic to your liver. 	
Swollen knee|Swelling. The skin around your kneecap can puff up noticeably, especially when you compare the affected knee to the normal one.	Stiffness. When your knee joint contains excess fluid, you might not be able to bend or straighten your leg completely.	Pain. Depending on the cause of the fluid buildup, the knee might be very painful — to the point that it's difficult or impossible to bear weight on it.	|Rest. Avoid weight-bearing activities as much as possible.	Ice and elevation. To control pain and swelling, apply ice to your knee for 15 to 20 minutes every two to four hours. When you ice your knee, raise your knee higher than the level of your heart, using pillows for comfort.	Pain relievers. Over-the-counter medicines such as acetaminophen (Tylenol, others) or ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin IB, others) can help reduce your knee pain.	
Swollen lymph nodes|Tender and painful lymph nodes	Swollen lymph nodes that may be the size of a pea or kidney bean, or even larger	|Apply warmth. Apply a warm, wet compress, such as a washcloth dipped in hot water and wrung out, to the affected area.	Take pain relievers. Over-the-counter pain relievers, such as aspirin, ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin IB, others) and acetaminophen (Tylenol, others), may help alleviate pain and fever. Don't give your child aspirin without consulting your doctor because of its link to Reye's syndrome in children. Reye's syndrome is a rare but serious illness that can affect the blood, liver and brain of a child or teenager recovering from a viral infection.	Get adequate rest. You often need rest to aid your recovery from the underlying condition.	
Syringomyelia|Muscle weakness and wasting (atrophy)	Loss of reflexes	Loss of sensitivity to pain and temperature	|Treatments and drugs	Coping and support	
Systemic capillary leak syndrome|Sudden swelling (edema) of the arms, legs and other parts of the body	Rapid drop in blood pressure	Shock	Lightheadedness	Weakness	Fatigue	Nausea	|Sudden swelling (edema) of the arms, legs and other parts of the body	Rapid drop in blood pressure	Shock	Lightheadedness	Weakness	Fatigue	Nausea	
Tachycardia|Dizziness	Shortness of breath	Lightheadedness	Rapid pulse rate	Heart palpitations — a racing, uncomfortable or irregular heartbeat or a sensation of "flopping" in the chest	Chest pain	Fainting (syncope)	|
Takayasu's arteritis|Fatigue 	Fast and unintentional weight loss 	Muscle aches 	Joint pain 	Slight fever 	|
Tapeworm infection|Nausea	Weakness	Loss of appetite	Abdominal pain	Diarrhea	Weight loss and inadequate absorption of nutrients from food	|
Tuberculosis|Latent TB. In this condition, you have a TB infection, but the bacteria remain in your body in an inactive state and cause no symptoms. Latent TB, also called inactive TB or TB infection, isn't contagious. It can turn into active TB, so treatment is important for the person with latent TB and to help control the spread of TB in general. An estimated 2 billion people have latent TB.	Active TB. This condition makes you sick and can spread to others. It can occur in the first few weeks after infection with the TB bacteria, or it might occur years later.	|
Temporal lobe seizure|A sudden sense of unprovoked fear	A deja vu experience — a feeling that what's happening has happened before	A sudden or strange odor or taste	A rising sensation in the abdomen	|Swimming. If you go in water, don't go alone and be sure to wear a life preserver.	Bathing. Bathing also can pose a risk of drowning. Shower instead.	Working high up. You could fall during a seizure.	Driving a car or operating other equipment. All states have licensing restrictions for driving for people with a history of seizures. The rules differ from state to state.	
TMJ disorders|Pain or tenderness of your jaw	Aching pain in and around your ear	Difficulty chewing or discomfort while chewing	Aching facial pain	Locking of the joint, making it difficult to open or close your mouth	|Avoid overuse of jaw muscles. Eat soft foods. Cut food into small pieces. Steer clear of sticky or chewy food. Avoid chewing gum.	Stretching and massage. Your doctor, dentist or physical therapist may show you how to do exercises that stretch and strengthen your jaw muscles and how to massage the muscles yourself.	Heat or cold. Applying warm, moist heat or ice to the side of your face may help alleviate pain.	
Tendinitis|Pain often described as a dull ache, especially when moving the affected limb or joint	Tenderness	Mild swelling	|Rest. Avoid activities that increase the pain or swelling. Don't try to work or play through the pain. Rest is essential to tissue healing. But it doesn't mean complete bed rest. You can do other activities and exercises that don't stress the injured tendon. Swimming and water exercise may be well-tolerated.	Ice. To decrease pain, muscle spasm and swelling, apply ice to the injured area for up to 20 minutes several times a day. Ice packs, ice massage or slush baths with ice and water all can help. For an ice massage, freeze a plastic foam cup full of water so that you can hold the cup while applying the ice directly to the skin.	Compression. Because swelling can result in loss of motion in an injured joint, compress the area until the swelling has ceased. Wraps or compressive elastic bandages are best.	Elevation. If tendinitis affects your knee, raise the affected leg above the level of your heart to reduce swelling.	
Tennis elbow|Shake hands	Turn a doorknob	Hold a coffee cup	|Rest. Avoid activities that aggravate your elbow pain.	Pain relievers. Try over-the-counter pain relievers, such as ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin IB) or naproxen (Aleve).	Ice. Apply ice or a cold pack for 15 minutes three to four times a day.	Technique. Make sure that you are using proper technique for your activities and avoiding repetitive wrist motions.	
Tension headache|Dull, aching head pain 	Sensation of tightness or pressure across your forehead or on the sides and back of your head 	Tenderness on your scalp, neck and shoulder muscles 	|Manage your stress level. One way to help reduce stress is by planning ahead and organizing your day. Another way is to allow more time to relax. And if you're caught in a stressful situation, consider stepping back. 	Go hot or cold. Applying heat or ice — whichever you prefer — to sore muscles, may ease a tension headache. For heat, use a heating pad set on low, a hot-water bottle, a warm compress or a hot towel. A hot bath or shower also may help. For cold, wrap ice, an ice pack or frozen vegetables in a cloth to protect your skin. 	Perfect your posture. Good posture can help keep your muscles from tensing. When standing, hold your shoulders back and your head level. Pull in your abdomen and buttocks. When sitting, make sure your thighs are parallel to the ground and your head isn't slumped forward. 	
Testicular cancer|A lump or enlargement in either testicle	A feeling of heaviness in the scrotum	A dull ache in the abdomen or groin	A sudden collection of fluid in the scrotum	Pain or discomfort in a testicle or the scrotum	Enlargement or tenderness of the breasts	Back pain	|
Testicular torsion|Sudden, severe pain in the scrotum — the loose bag of skin under your penis that contains the testicles	Swelling of the scrotum	Abdominal pain	Nausea and vomiting	A testicle that's positioned higher than normal or at an unusual angle	Painful urination	Fever	|
Tetanus|Spasms and stiffness in your jaw muscles	Stiffness of your neck muscles	Difficulty swallowing	Stiffness of your abdominal muscles	Painful body spasms lasting for several minutes, typically triggered by minor occurrences, such as a draft, loud noise, physical touch or light	|Control bleeding. If the wound is bleeding, apply direct pressure to control the bleeding.	Keep the wound clean. After the bleeding has stopped, rinse the wound thoroughly with clean running water (or saline solution if available). Clean the area around the wound with soap and a washcloth. If debris is embedded in a wound, see your doctor.	Use an antibiotic. After you clean the wound, apply a thin layer of an antibiotic cream or ointment, such as the multi-ingredient antibiotics Neosporin and Polysporin. These antibiotics won't make the wound heal faster, but they can discourage bacterial growth and infection and may allow the wound to heal more efficiently. Certain ingredients in some ointments can cause a mild rash in some people. If a rash appears, stop using the ointment.	Cover the wound. Exposure to the air may speed healing, but bandages can help keep the wound clean and keep harmful bacteria out. Blisters that are draining are vulnerable. Keep them covered until a scab forms.	Change the dressing. Apply a new dressing at least once a day or whenever the dressing becomes wet or dirty to help prevent infection. If you're allergic to the adhesive used in most bandages, switch to adhesive-free dressings or sterile gauze and paper tape.	
Tetralogy of Fallot|A bluish coloration of the skin caused by blood low in oxygen (cyanosis)	Shortness of breath and rapid breathing, especially during feeding or exercise	Loss of consciousness (fainting)	Clubbing of fingers and toes — an abnormal, rounded shape of the nail bed	Poor weight gain	Tiring easily during play or exercise	Irritability	Prolonged crying	A heart murmur	|Preventing infection. A child who has severe heart defects might need to take preventive antibiotics before certain dental and surgical procedures. Your child's doctor can tell you if this is necessary. Maintaining good oral hygiene and getting regular dental checkups are excellent ways to help prevent infection.	 Exercising and play. Parents of children who have congenital heart defects often worry about the risks of rough play and vigorous activity even after successful treatment. Although some children might need to limit the amount or type of exercise, many can lead normal or near-normal lives. Decisions about exercise need to be made on a case-by-case basis, so ask your child's doctor which activities are safe for your child. 	
Transient global amnesia|Sudden onset of memory loss, verified by a witness	Retention of personal identity despite memory loss	Normal cognition, such as the ability to recognize and name familiar objects and follow simple directions	Absence of signs indicating damage to a particular area of the brain, such as limb paralysis, involuntary movement or impaired word recognition	|
Thalassemia|Fatigue	Weakness	Pale appearance	Yellow discoloration of skin (jaundice)	Facial bone deformities	Slow growth	Abdominal swelling	Dark urine	|Avoid excess iron. Unless your doctor recommends it, don't take vitamins or other supplements that contain iron.	Eat a healthy diet. Eating a balanced diet that contains plenty of nutritious foods can help you feel better and boost your energy. Your doctor also may recommend you take a folic acid supplement to help your body make new red blood cells. Also, to keep your bones healthy, make sure your diet contains adequate calcium and vitamin D. Ask your doctor what the right amounts are for you and whether you need to take a supplement.	Avoid infections. Protect yourself from infections with frequent hand-washing and by avoiding sick people. This is especially important if you've had to have your spleen removed. You'll also need an annual flu shot, as well as the meningitis, pneumococcal and hepatitis B vaccines to prevent infections. If you develop a fever or other signs and symptoms of an infection, see your doctor for treatment.	
Thoracic outlet syndrome| Neurogenic (neurological) thoracic outlet syndrome. This form of thoracic outlet syndrome is characterized by compression of the brachial plexus. The brachial plexus is a network of nerves that come from your spinal cord and control muscle movements and sensation in your shoulder, arm and hand. In the majority of thoracic outlet syndrome cases, the symptoms are neurogenic. 	Vascular thoracic outlet syndrome. This type of thoracic outlet syndrome occurs when one or more of the veins (venous thoracic outlet syndrome) or arteries (arterial thoracic outlet syndrome) under the collarbone (clavicle) are compressed. 	 Nonspecific-type thoracic outlet syndrome. This type is also called disputed thoracic outlet syndrome. Some doctors don't believe it exists, while others say it's a common disorder. People with nonspecific-type thoracic outlet syndrome have chronic pain in the area of the thoracic outlet that worsens with activity, but the specific cause of the pain can't be determined. 	|Maintain good posture 	Take frequent breaks at work to move and stretch 	Maintain a healthy weight 	Try applying heat or massaging the painful area 	Avoid carrying heavy bags over your shoulder 	Avoid activities that worsen symptoms, or find ways to adapt activities so they don't cause symptoms 	Create a work area that allows you to keep good posture and doesn't make symptoms worse 	
Throat cancer|A cough	Changes in your voice, such as hoarseness or not speaking clearly	Difficulty swallowing	Ear pain	A lump or sore that doesn't heal	A sore throat	Weight loss	|Smoking makes treatment less effective.	Smoking makes it harder for your body to heal after surgery.	Smoking increases your risk of getting another cancer in the future.	
Thrombocytopenia|Easy or excessive bruising (purpura)	Superficial bleeding into the skin that appears as a rash of pinpoint-sized reddish-purple spots (petechiae), usually on the lower legs	Prolonged bleeding from cuts	Bleeding from your gums or nose	Blood in urine or stools	Unusually heavy menstrual flows	Fatigue	Enlarged spleen	Jaundice	|Avoid activities that could cause injury. Ask your doctor which activities are safe for you. Contact sports, such as boxing, martial arts and football, carry a high risk of injury.	Drink alcohol in moderation, if at all. Alcohol slows the production of platelets in your body. Ask your doctor whether it's OK for you to drink alcohol.	Use caution with over-the-counter medications. Over-the-counter pain medications, such as aspirin and ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin IB, others) can impair platelet function.	
Thrombocytosis|Headache	Dizziness or lightheadedness	Chest pain	Weakness	Fainting	Temporary vision changes	Numbness or tingling of the hands and feet	|
Thrombophlebitis|Warmth, tenderness and pain in the affected area	Redness and swelling	|Use a warm washcloth to apply heat to the involved area several times daily	Elevate your leg	Use a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug, such as ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin IB, others) or naproxen sodium (Aleve, others), if recommended by your doctor	
Thumb arthritis|Swelling, stiffness and tenderness at the base of your thumb	Decreased strength when pinching or grasping objects	Decreased range of motion	Enlarged or bony appearance of the joint at the base of your thumb	|Modify hand tools. Consider purchasing adaptive equipment — such as jar openers, key turners and large zipper pulls — designed for people with limited hand strength. Replace traditional door handles, which you must grasp with your thumb, with levers.	Apply cold. Icing the joint for five to 15 minutes several times a day can help relieve swelling and pain.	
Thunderclap headaches|Strikes suddenly and severely — sometimes described as the worst headache ever experienced	Peaks within 60 seconds	Lasts anywhere between an hour and 10 days	Can occur anywhere in the head, and may involve the neck or lower back	Can be accompanied by nausea, vomiting or loss of consciousness	|
Thyroid cancer|A lump that can be felt through the skin on your neck	Changes to your voice, including increasing hoarseness	Difficulty swallowing	Pain in your neck and throat	Swollen lymph nodes in your neck	|
Thyroid nodules|Be felt	Be seen, often as a swelling at the base of your neck	Press on your windpipe or esophagus, causing shortness of breath or difficulty swallowing	|
Transient ischemic attack (TIA)|Weakness, numbness or paralysis in your face, arm or leg, typically on one side of your body	Slurred or garbled speech or difficulty understanding others	Blindness in one or both eyes or double vision	Dizziness or loss of balance or coordination	|
Trigeminal neuralgia|Episodes of severe, shooting or jabbing pain that may feel like an electric shock	Spontaneous attacks of pain or attacks triggered by things such as touching the face, chewing, speaking and brushing teeth	Bouts of pain lasting from a few seconds to several minutes	Episodes of several attacks lasting days, weeks, months or longer — some people have periods when they experience no pain	Constant aching, burning feeling that's less intense than the spasm-like pain	Pain in areas supplied by the trigeminal nerve, including the cheek, jaw, teeth, gums, lips, or less often the eye and forehead	Pain affecting one side of the face at a time, though may rarely affect both sides of the face	Pain focused in one spot or spread in a wider pattern	Attacks that become more frequent and intense over time	|
Tinea versicolor|Patches of skin discoloration, usually on the back, chest, neck and upper arms, which may appear lighter or darker than usual	Mild itching	Scaling	|Clotrimazole (Lotrimin AF) cream or lotion	Miconazole (Micaderm) cream	Selenium sulfide (Selsun Blue) 1 percent lotion	Terbinafine (Lamisil AT) cream or gel	Zinc pyrithione soap	
Tongue cancer|In the mouth, where it may be more likely to be seen and felt (oral tongue cancer). This type of tongue cancer tends to be diagnosed when the cancer is small and more easily removed through surgery.	 In the throat, at the base of the tongue, where tongue cancer may develop with few signs and symptoms (hypopharyngeal tongue cancer). Base of tongue cancer is usually diagnosed at an advanced stage, when the tumor is larger and the cancer has spread into the lymph nodes in the neck. Increasingly, base of tongue cancers are associated with human papillomavirus (HPV), which has a profound effect on the prognosis and treatment of the cancer. 	|In the mouth, where it may be more likely to be seen and felt (oral tongue cancer). This type of tongue cancer tends to be diagnosed when the cancer is small and more easily removed through surgery.	 In the throat, at the base of the tongue, where tongue cancer may develop with few signs and symptoms (hypopharyngeal tongue cancer). Base of tongue cancer is usually diagnosed at an advanced stage, when the tumor is larger and the cancer has spread into the lymph nodes in the neck. Increasingly, base of tongue cancers are associated with human papillomavirus (HPV), which has a profound effect on the prognosis and treatment of the cancer. 	
Tongue-tie (ankyloglossia)|Difficulty lifting the tongue to the upper teeth or moving the tongue from side to side	Trouble sticking out the tongue past the lower front teeth	A tongue that appears notched or heart shaped when stuck out	|
Tonsillitis|Red, swollen tonsils	White or yellow coating or patches on the tonsils	Sore throat	Difficult or painful swallowing	Fever	Enlarged, tender glands (lymph nodes) in the neck	A scratchy, muffled or throaty voice	Bad breath	Stomachache, particularly in younger children	Stiff neck	Headache	|
Torn meniscus|A popping sensation	Swelling or stiffness	Pain, especially when twisting or rotating your knee	Difficulty straightening your knee fully	Experiencing what feels like a block to moving your knee, as if your knee were locked in place	|Treatments and drugs	
Toxic hepatitis|Yellowing of the skin and whites of the eyes (jaundice) 	Itching 	Abdominal pain in the upper right portion of the abdomen 	Fatigue 	Loss of appetite 	Nausea and vomiting 	Rash 	Weight loss 	Dark or tea-colored urine 	|
Toxic shock syndrome|A sudden high fever	Low blood pressure (hypotension)	Vomiting or diarrhea	A rash resembling a sunburn, particularly on your palms and soles	Confusion	Muscle aches	Redness of your eyes, mouth and throat	Seizures	Headaches	|
Toxoplasmosis|Body aches	Swollen lymph nodes	Headache	Fever	Fatigue	|
Trachoma|Mild itching and irritation of the eyes and eyelids	Discharge from the eyes containing mucus or pus	Eyelid swelling	Light sensitivity (photophobia)	Eye pain	|
Transverse myelitis|Pain. Pain associated with transverse myelitis often begins suddenly in your neck or back, depending on the part of your spinal cord that's affected. Sharp, shooting sensations may also radiate down your legs or arms or around your abdomen.	Abnormal sensations. Some people with transverse myelitis report sensations of numbness, tingling, coldness or burning. Some are especially sensitive to the light touch of clothing or to extreme heat or cold. You may feel as if something is tightly wrapping the skin of your chest, abdomen or legs.	Weakness in your arms or legs. Some people with mild weakness notice that they're stumbling or dragging one foot or that their legs feel heavy as they move. Others may develop paralysis.	Bladder and bowel problems. These problems may include an increased urinary urge, urinary incontinence, difficulty urinating and constipation.	|
Traumatic brain injury|Loss of consciousness for a few seconds to a few minutes 	No loss of consciousness, but a state of being dazed, confused or disoriented 	Headache 	Nausea or vomiting 	Fatigue or drowsiness 	Difficulty sleeping 	Sleeping more than usual 	Dizziness or loss of balance 	|
Traveler's diarrhea|Abrupt onset of passage of three or more loose stools a day 	An urgent need to defecate 	Abdominal cramps 	Nausea 	Vomiting 	Fever 	|Treatments and drugs	Prevention	
Trench mouth|Severe gum pain 	Bleeding from gums when they're pressed even slightly 	Red or swollen gums 	Pain when eating or swallowing 	Gray film on your gums 	Crater-like sores (ulcers) between your teeth and on your gums 	Foul taste in your mouth 	Bad breath 	Fever and fatigue (malaise) 	Swollen lymph nodes around your head, neck or jaw 	|Avoid smoking or using other tobacco products 	Take pain medications as recommended 	Follow a liquid diet, if recommended, the first few days of treatment to minimize pain 	Avoid spicy or very hot foods, which can irritate your tender gums 	Drink plenty of water to stay hydrated 	Avoid drinking carbonated beverages or alcohol 	Keep all dental appointments 	Get plenty of rest to reduce physical and emotional stress 	Eat a healthy diet to improve nutrition 	
Trichinosis|Diarrhea	Abdominal pain	Fatigue	Nausea and vomiting	|
Trichomoniasis|A profuse and often foul-smelling vaginal discharge — which may be white, gray, yellow or green	Genital redness, burning and itching	Pain with urination or sexual intercourse	|
Trichotillomania|Repeatedly pulling your hair out, typically from your scalp, eyebrows or eyelashes, but can be from other body areas, and sites may vary over time	An increasing sense of tension before pulling, or when you try to resist pulling	A sense of pleasure or relief after the hair is pulled	Shortened hair or thinned or bald areas on the scalp or other areas of your body, including sparse or missing eyelashes or eyebrows	Preference for specific types of hair, rituals that accompany hair pulling or patterns of hair pulling	Biting, chewing or eating pulled-out hair	Playing with pulled-out hair or rubbing it across your lips or face	|
Tricuspid atresia|Blue tinge to the skin and lips (cyanosis)	Difficulty breathing (dyspnea)	Tiring easily, especially during feedings	Slow growth and poor weight gain	| Strive for good nutrition. Your baby may have a difficult time taking in enough calories, both because he or she tires more easily during feeding and because of an increased demand for calories. It's often helpful to give your baby frequent, small feedings. Breast milk is an excellent source of nutrition, but formula works well, too. You may find that a combination of both provides a good balance of nutrition and scheduling flexibility. Ask your doctor or hospital about available resources for pumping breast milk. Some hospitals rent breast pumps. Your child's cardiologist may also recommend nutritional supplements or visiting a dietitian for the details. 	 Preventive antibiotics. Your child's cardiologist will likely recommend that your child take preventive antibiotics before certain dental and other procedures to prevent bacteria from entering the bloodstream and infecting the inner lining of the heart (infective endocarditis). Practicing good oral hygiene — brushing and flossing teeth, getting regular dental checkups — is another good way of preventing infection. 	Help your child stay active. Encourage as much normal play and activity as your child is able to tolerate, or as your doctor recommends, with ample opportunity for rest and nap time. Staying active helps your child's heart stay fit.	Keep up with routine well-child care. Standard immunizations are encouraged for children with congenital heart defects, as well as vaccines against the flu, pneumonia and respiratory syncytial virus infections.	Keep regular follow-up appointments with your child's doctor. Your child may need regular annual appointments with his or her doctor trained in congenital heart conditions to evaluate his or her condition. Your child's doctor may recommend several tests to evaluate your child's heart condition.	
Trigger finger|Finger stiffness, particularly in the morning	A popping or clicking sensation as you move your finger	Tenderness or a bump (nodule) in the palm at the base of the affected finger	Finger catching or locking in a bent position, which suddenly pops straight	Finger locked in a bent position, which you are unable to straighten	|
Truncus arteriosus|Blue coloring of the skin (cyanosis)	Poor feeding	Pounding heart	Irritability	Excessive sleepiness	Poor growth	Shortness of breath (dyspnea)	Rapid breathing (tachypnea)	|
Tuberous sclerosis|Skin abnormalities. Some people with tuberous sclerosis have patches of light-colored skin, or they may develop small, harmless areas of thickened skin, or growths under or around the nails. Facial lesions that resemble acne also are common and can be treated.	Seizures. Lesions in the brain may be associated with seizures, which can be the first symptom of tuberous sclerosis. In small children, a common type of seizure called infantile spasm shows up as repetitive spasms of the head and legs.	Developmental delays. Tuberous sclerosis can be associated with intellectual disability, learning disabilities or developmental delays.	Behavior problems. Common behavior problems may include hyperactivity, raging outbursts, aggression, repetitive behaviors, or social and emotional withdrawal.	Communication and social interaction problems. Some children with tuberous sclerosis have trouble with communication and social interaction. And some children may have autism spectrum disorder.	Kidney problems. Most people with tuberous sclerosis develop lesions on their kidneys, and they may develop more lesions as they age, sometimes damaging kidney function.	Heart problems. These lesions, if present, are usually largest at birth and shrink as the child gets older.	Lung problems. Lesions that develop in the lungs (pulmonary leiomyomas) may cause coughing or shortness of breath, especially with physical activity or exercise.	Eye abnormalities. Lesions can appear as white patches on the light-sensitive tissue at the back of the eye (retina). These do not always interfere with vision.	|
Tularemia|A skin ulcer that forms at the site of infection — usually an insect or animal bite	Swollen and painful lymph glands	Fever	Chills	Headache	Exhaustion	|
Turner syndrome|Large fluid collection on the back of the neck or other abnormal fluid collections	Heart abnormalities	Abnormal kidneys	|
Type 1 diabetes|Increased thirst	Frequent urination	Bedwetting in children who previously didn't wet the bed during the night	Extreme hunger	Unintended weight loss	Irritability and other mood changes	Fatigue and weakness	Blurred vision	In females, a vaginal yeast infection	|Make a commitment to managing your diabetes. Take your medications as recommended. Learn all you can about type 1 diabetes. Make healthy eating and physical activity part of your daily routine. Establish a relationship with a diabetes educator, and ask your diabetes treatment team for help when you need it.	Identify yourself. Wear a tag or bracelet that says you have diabetes. Keep a glucagon kit nearby in case of a low blood sugar emergency — and make sure your friends and loved ones know how to use it.	Schedule a yearly physical exam and regular eye exams. Your regular diabetes checkups aren't meant to replace yearly physicals or routine eye exams. During the physical, your doctor will look for any diabetes-related complications, as well as screen for other medical problems. Your eye care specialist will check for signs of retinal damage, cataracts and glaucoma.	 Keep your immunizations up to date. High blood sugar can weaken your immune system. Get a flu shot every year. Your doctor will likely recommend the pneumonia vaccine, as well. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) also recommends hepatitis B vaccination if you haven't previously been vaccinated against hepatitis B and you're an adult ages 19 to 59 with type 1 or type 2 diabetes. The CDC advises vaccination as soon as possible after diagnosis with type 1 or type 2 diabetes. If you're age 60 or older and have diabetes and haven't previously received the vaccine, talk to your doctor about whether it's right for you. 	Pay attention to your feet. Wash your feet daily in lukewarm water. Dry them gently, especially between the toes. Moisturize your feet with lotion. Check your feet every day for blisters, cuts, sores, redness or swelling. Consult your doctor if you have a sore or other foot problem that doesn't heal.	Keep your blood pressure and cholesterol under control. Eating healthy foods and exercising regularly can go a long way toward controlling high blood pressure and cholesterol. Medication may be needed, too.	If you smoke or use other forms of tobacco, ask your doctor to help you quit. Smoking increases your risk of diabetes complications, including heart attack, stroke, nerve damage and kidney disease. In fact, smokers who have diabetes are three times more likely to die prematurely than are nonsmokers who have diabetes, according to the American Diabetes Association. Talk to your doctor about ways to stop smoking or to stop using other types of tobacco.	If you drink alcohol, do so responsibly. Alcohol can cause either high or low blood sugar, depending on how much you drink and if you eat at the same time. If you choose to drink, do so only in moderation and always with a meal. And be sure to check your blood sugar levels before going to sleep.	 Take stress seriously. The hormones your body may produce in response to prolonged stress may prevent insulin from working properly, which can stress and frustrate you even more. Take a step back and set some limits. Prioritize your tasks. Learn relaxation techniques. Get plenty of sleep. 	
Type 1 diabetes in children|Increased thirst and frequent urination. As excess sugar builds up in your child's bloodstream, fluid is pulled from the tissues. This may leave your child thirsty. As a result, your child may drink — and urinate — more than usual.	Extreme hunger. Without enough insulin to move sugar into your child's cells, your child's muscles and organs become energy-depleted. This triggers intense hunger.	Weight loss. Despite eating more than usual to relieve hunger, your child may lose weight — sometimes rapidly. Without the energy sugar supplies, muscle tissues and fat stores simply shrink. Unexplained weight loss is often the first sign to be noticed.	Fatigue. If your child's cells are deprived of sugar, he or she may become tired and lethargic.	Irritability or unusual behavior. Children with undiagnosed type 1 diabetes may suddenly seem moody or irritable.	Blurred vision. If your child's blood sugar is too high, fluid may be pulled from the lenses of your child's eyes. This may affect your child's ability to focus clearly.	Yeast infection. Girls with type 1 diabetes may have a genital yeast infection, and babies can develop diaper rash caused by yeast.	|Encourage him or her to take an increasingly active role in diabetes management	Stress the importance of lifelong diabetes care	Teach your child how to test his or her blood sugar and inject insulin	Help your child make wise food choices	Encourage your child to remain physically active	Foster a relationship between your child and his or her diabetes treatment team	Make sure your child wears a medical identification tag	
Type 2 diabetes in children|Increased thirst and urination. As excess sugar builds up in your child's bloodstream, fluid is pulled from the tissues. This may leave your child thirsty. As a result, your child may drink — and urinate — more than usual. 	Increased hunger. Without enough insulin to move sugar into your child's cells, your child's muscles and organs become depleted of energy. This triggers hunger. 	Weight loss. Despite eating more than usual to relieve hunger, your child may lose weight. Without the energy that sugar supplies to your cells, muscle tissues and fat stores simply shrink.	Fatigue. If your child's cells are deprived of sugar, he or she may become tired and irritable.	Blurred vision. If your child's blood sugar is too high, fluid may be pulled from the lenses of your child's eyes. This may affect your child's ability to focus clearly.	Slow-healing sores or frequent infections. Type 2 diabetes affects your child's ability to heal and resist infections.	Areas of darkened skin. Areas of darkened skin (acanthosis nigricans) may be a sign of insulin resistance. These dark patches often occur in the armpits or neck.	|
Typhoid fever|Fever that starts low and increases daily, possibly reaching as high as 104.9 F (40.5 C)	Headache	Weakness and fatigue	Muscle aches	Sweating	Dry cough	Loss of appetite and weight loss	Abdominal pain	Diarrhea or constipation	Rash	Extremely swollen abdomen	|
Ulcerative colitis|Diarrhea, often with blood or pus 	Abdominal pain and cramping 	Rectal pain 	Rectal bleeding — passing small amount of blood with stool 	Urgency to defecate 	Inability to defecate despite urgency 	Weight loss 	Fatigue 	Fever 	In children, failure to grow 	|Limit dairy products. Many people with inflammatory bowel disease find that problems such as diarrhea, abdominal pain and gas improve by limiting or eliminating dairy products. You may be lactose intolerant — that is, your body can't digest the milk sugar (lactose) in dairy foods. Using an enzyme product such as Lactaid may help as well.	Try low-fat foods. If you have Crohn's disease of the small intestine, you may not be able to digest or absorb fat normally. Instead, fat passes through your intestine, making your diarrhea worse. Try avoiding butter, margarine, cream sauces and fried foods.	Limit fiber, if it's a problem food. If you have inflammatory bowel disease, high-fiber foods, such as fresh fruits and vegetables and whole grains, may make your symptoms worse. If raw fruits and vegetables bother you, try steaming, baking or stewing them. In general, you may have more problems with foods in the cabbage family, such as broccoli and cauliflower, and nuts, seeds, corn and popcorn. You may be told to limit fiber or go on a low-residue diet if you have a narrowing of your bowel (stricture).	Avoid other problem foods. Spicy foods, alcohol and caffeine may make your signs and symptoms worse.	
Ulnar wrist pain|Trauma. Falling with your wrist outstretched is one way to cause ulnar wrist pain. Injuries that occur during sports that may overextend the wrist — such as racket sports, golf and football — also can cause ulnar wrist pain by damaging ligaments or tendons in the wrist.	Overuse. In addition to causing wrist pain from injuries, sports such as tennis or golf can cause problems due to overuse. Using a computer mouse or keyboard in a position that causes stress on the wrist can lead to wrist pain due to overuse. Certain occupations also can lead to overuse problems in the wrist, such as carpentry and plumbing, because they often must use tools in small spaces that require awkward positioning of the wrist.	Arthritis. As with other joints, arthritis in the wrist can result in pain.	|Trauma. Falling with your wrist outstretched is one way to cause ulnar wrist pain. Injuries that occur during sports that may overextend the wrist — such as racket sports, golf and football — also can cause ulnar wrist pain by damaging ligaments or tendons in the wrist.	Overuse. In addition to causing wrist pain from injuries, sports such as tennis or golf can cause problems due to overuse. Using a computer mouse or keyboard in a position that causes stress on the wrist can lead to wrist pain due to overuse. Certain occupations also can lead to overuse problems in the wrist, such as carpentry and plumbing, because they often must use tools in small spaces that require awkward positioning of the wrist.	Arthritis. As with other joints, arthritis in the wrist can result in pain.	
Umbilical hernia|Your baby appears to be in pain	Your baby begins to vomit	The bulge becomes tender, swollen or discolored	|
Undescended testicle|A retractile testicle, which moves back and forth between the scrotum and the groin and may be easily guided by hand into the scrotum during a physical exam. This is not abnormal and is due to a muscle reflex in the scrotum.	An ascending testicle, or acquired undescended testicle, which has "returned" to the groin and can't be easily guided by hand into the scrotum.	|Treatments and drugs	Coping and support	
Urethral stricture|Tissue damage from a urologic procedure using medical instruments inserted into the urethra, such as an endoscope for viewing urinary tract structures	Intermittent or long-term use of a catheter, a tube inserted through the urethra to drain the bladder	Trauma or direct injury to the urethra or pelvis, such as a pelvic fracture	Enlarged prostate or previous surgery to remove or reduce an enlarged prostate gland	Cancer of the urethra or prostate	Sexually transmitted infections	|Tissue damage from a urologic procedure using medical instruments inserted into the urethra, such as an endoscope for viewing urinary tract structures	Intermittent or long-term use of a catheter, a tube inserted through the urethra to drain the bladder	Trauma or direct injury to the urethra or pelvis, such as a pelvic fracture	Enlarged prostate or previous surgery to remove or reduce an enlarged prostate gland	Cancer of the urethra or prostate	Sexually transmitted infections	
Urinary incontinence|Stress incontinence. Urine leaks when you exert pressure on your bladder by coughing, sneezing, laughing, exercising or lifting something heavy.	Urge incontinence. You have a sudden, intense urge to urinate followed by an involuntary loss of urine. You may need to urinate often, including throughout the night. Urge incontinence may be caused by a minor condition, such as infection, or a more severe condition such as neurologic disorder or diabetes.	Overflow incontinence. You experience frequent or constant dribbling of urine due to a bladder that doesn't empty completely.	Functional incontinence. A physical or mental impairment keeps you from making it to the toilet in time. For example, if you have severe arthritis, you may not be able to unbutton your pants quickly enough.	Mixed incontinence. You experience more than one type of urinary incontinence.	|Use a washcloth to clean yourself	Allow your skin to air-dry	Avoid frequent washing and douching because these can overwhelm your body's natural defenses against bladder infections	Consider using a barrier cream, such as petroleum jelly or cocoa butter, to protect your skin from urine	
Urinary tract infection (UTI)|A strong, persistent urge to urinate	A burning sensation when urinating	Passing frequent, small amounts of urine	Urine that appears cloudy	Urine that appears red, bright pink or cola-colored — a sign of blood in the urine	Strong-smelling urine	Pelvic pain, in women — especially in the center of the pelvis and around the area of the pubic bone	| Drink plenty of water. Water helps to dilute your urine and flush out bacteria. 	 Avoid drinks that may irritate your bladder. Avoid coffee, alcohol, and soft drinks containing citrus juices or caffeine until your infection has cleared. They can irritate your bladder and tend to aggravate your frequent or urgent need to urinate. 	 Use a heating pad. Apply a warm, but not hot, heating pad to your abdomen to minimize bladder pressure or discomfort. 	
Urine color|Visible blood in your urine. Bloody urine is common in urinary tract infections and kidney stones. Both of these problems usually cause pain. Painless bleeding may signal a more serious problem, such as cancer.	Dark or orange urine. If your urine is dark or orange — particularly if you also have pale stools and yellow skin and eyes — your liver might be malfunctioning.	|Treatments and drugs	
Uterine fibroids|Heavy menstrual bleeding	Prolonged menstrual periods — seven days or more of menstrual bleeding	Pelvic pressure or pain	Frequent urination	Difficulty emptying your bladder	Constipation	Backache or leg pains	|
Uterine polyps|Irregular menstrual bleeding — for example, having frequent, unpredictable periods of variable length and heaviness	Bleeding between menstrual periods	Excessively heavy menstrual periods	Vaginal bleeding after menopause	Infertility	|
Uterine prolapse|Sensation of heaviness or pulling in your pelvis	Tissue protruding from your vagina	Urinary problems, such as urine leakage or urine retention	Trouble having a bowel movement	Low back pain	Feeling as if you're sitting on a small ball or as if something is falling out of your vagina	Sexual concerns, such as a sensation of looseness in the tone of your vaginal tissue	Symptoms that are less bothersome in the morning and worsen as the day goes on	|Perform Kegel exercises.	Avoid constipation by eating high-fiber foods and drinking plenty of fluids.	Avoid heavy lifting and straining.	Try to control coughing.	Lose weight if you're overweight or obese.	
Uveitis|Eye redness	Eye pain	Light sensitivity	Blurred vision	Dark, floating spots in your field of vision (floaters)	Decreased vision	|
Vaginal atrophy|Vaginal dryness 	Vaginal burning 	Vaginal discharge 	Genital itching 	Burning with urination 	Urgency with urination 	More urinary tract infections 	Urinary incontinence 	Light bleeding after intercourse 	Discomfort with intercourse 	Decreased vaginal lubrication during sexual activity 	Shortening and tightening of the vaginal canal 	|Try an over-the-counter moisturizer (Replens, Vagisil Feminine Moisturizer, others). This can restore some moisture to your vaginal area. 	Use an over-the-counter water-based lubricant (glycerin-free versions of Astroglide, K-Y Intrigue, others). This can reduce discomfort during intercourse. 	Allow time to become aroused during intercourse. The vaginal lubrication that results from sexual arousal can help reduce symptoms of dryness or burning. 	
Vaginal cancer|Unusual vaginal bleeding, for example, after intercourse or after menopause	Watery vaginal discharge	A lump or mass in your vagina	Painful urination	Constipation	Pelvic pain	|
Vaginal fistula|Vesicovaginal fistula. Also called a bladder fistula, this opening occurs between your vagina and urinary bladder and is the type that doctors see most often.	Ureterovaginal fistula. This type of fistula happens when the abnormal opening develops between your vagina and the ducts that carry urine from your kidneys to your bladder (ureters).	Urethrovaginal fistula. In this type of fistula, also called a urethral fistula, the opening occurs between your vagina and the tube that carries urine out of your body (urethra).	Rectovaginal fistula. In this type of fistula, also known as a rectal fistula, the opening is between your vagina and the lower portion of your large intestine (rectum).	Colovaginal fistula. With a colovaginal fistula, the opening occurs between the vagina and colon.	Enterovaginal fistula. In this type of fistula, the opening is between the small intestine and the vagina.	|Vesicovaginal fistula. Also called a bladder fistula, this opening occurs between your vagina and urinary bladder and is the type that doctors see most often.	Ureterovaginal fistula. This type of fistula happens when the abnormal opening develops between your vagina and the ducts that carry urine from your kidneys to your bladder (ureters).	Urethrovaginal fistula. In this type of fistula, also called a urethral fistula, the opening occurs between your vagina and the tube that carries urine out of your body (urethra).	Rectovaginal fistula. In this type of fistula, also known as a rectal fistula, the opening is between your vagina and the lower portion of your large intestine (rectum).	Colovaginal fistula. With a colovaginal fistula, the opening occurs between the vagina and colon.	Enterovaginal fistula. In this type of fistula, the opening is between the small intestine and the vagina.	
Vaginitis|Change in color, odor or amount of discharge from your vagina	Vaginal itching or irritation	Pain during intercourse	Painful urination	Light vaginal bleeding or spotting	|Use an over-the-counter medication specifically for yeast infections. Options include one-day, three-day or seven-day courses of cream or vaginal suppositories. The active ingredient varies, depending on the product: clotrimazole (Gyne-Lotrimin), miconazole (Monistat) or tioconazole (Vagistat). Some products also come with an external cream to apply to the labia and opening of the vagina. Follow package directions and complete the entire course of treatment, even if you're feeling better right away.	Apply a cold compress, such as a washcloth, to the labial area to ease discomfort until the antifungal medication takes full effect.	
Valley fever|Fever	Cough	Chest pain	Chills	Night sweats	Headache	Fatigue	Joint aches	Red, spotty rash	|
Varicocele|Vary from sharp to dull discomfort	Increase with standing or physical exertion, especially over long periods	Worsen over the course of a day	Be relieved when you lie on your back	|Take over-the-counter painkillers, such as acetaminophen (Tylenol, others) or ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin IB, others).	Wear an athletic supporter to relieve pressure.	
Vascular dementia|Confusion	Trouble paying attention and concentrating	Reduced ability to organize thoughts or actions	Decline in ability to analyze a situation, develop an effective plan and communicate that plan to others 	Difficulty deciding what to do next	Problems with memory	Restlessness and agitation 	Unsteady gait	Sudden or frequent urge to urinate or inability to control passing urine	Depression	|
Vasculitis|Fever	Headache	Fatigue	Weight loss	General aches and pains	Night sweats	Rash	Nerve problems, such as numbness or weakness	Loss of a pulse in a limb	|
Ventricular fibrillation|Chest pain	Rapid heartbeat (tachycardia)	Dizziness	Nausea	Shortness of breath	Loss of consciousness	|
Ventricular septal defect|Poor eating, failure to thrive	Fast breathing or breathlessness	Easy tiring	|
Vesicoureteral reflux|A strong, persistent urge to urinate	A burning sensation when urinating	Passing frequent, small amounts of urine	Blood in the urine (hematuria) or cloudy, strong-smelling urine	Fever	Pain in your side (flank) or abdomen	Hesitancy to urinate or holding urine to avoid the burning sensation	| Encourage your child to drink fluids, particularly water. Drinking water dilutes urine and may help flush out bacteria. Avoid juices and soft drinks containing citrus and caffeine until your child's infection has cleared. They can irritate the bladder and tend to aggravate the frequent or urgent need to urinate. 	Provide a warm blanket or towel. Place a towel or blanket in the dryer for a few minutes to warm it up. Be sure the towel or blanket is just warm, not hot, and then place it over your child's abdomen. The warmth can help minimize feelings of bladder pressure or pain.	
Viral gastroenteritis|Watery, usually nonbloody diarrhea — bloody diarrhea usually means you have a different, more severe infection	Abdominal cramps and pain	Nausea, vomiting or both	Occasional muscle aches or headache	Low-grade fever	|Let your stomach settle. Stop eating solid foods for a few hours.	Try sucking on ice chips or taking small sips of water. You might also try drinking clear soda, clear broths or noncaffeinated sports drinks. Drink plenty of liquid every day, taking small, frequent sips.	Ease back into eating. Gradually begin to eat bland, easy-to-digest foods, such as soda crackers, toast, gelatin, bananas, rice and chicken. Stop eating if your nausea returns.	Avoid certain foods and substances until you feel better. These include dairy products, caffeine, alcohol, nicotine, and fatty or highly seasoned foods.	Get plenty of rest. The illness and dehydration may have made you weak and tired.	Be cautious with medications. Use many medications, such as ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin IB, others), sparingly if at all. They can make your stomach more upset. Use acetaminophen (Tylenol, others) cautiously; it sometimes can cause liver toxicity, especially in children. Don't give aspirin to children or teens because of the risk of Reye's syndrome, a rare, but potentially fatal disease. Before choosing a pain reliever or fever reducer discuss with your child's pediatrician.	
Viral hemorrhagic fevers|High fever 	Fatigue 	Dizziness 	Muscle, bone or joint aches 	Weakness 	|Dengue 	Ebola 	Lassa 	Marburg 	Yellow fever 	
Vitamin deficiency anemia|Fatigue 	Shortness of breath 	Dizziness 	Pale or yellowish skin 	Irregular heartbeats 	Weight loss 	Numbness or tingling in your hands and feet 	Muscle weakness 	Personality changes 	Unsteady movements 	Mental confusion or forgetfulness 	|
Vitiligo|Skin discoloration	Premature whitening or graying of the hair on your scalp, eyelashes, eyebrows or beard (usually before age 35)	Loss of color in the tissues that line the inside of your mouth and nose (mucous membranes)	Loss of or change in color of the inner layer of the eyeball (retina)	Discolored patches around the armpits, navel, genitals and rectum	| Protect your skin from the sun and artificial sources of UV light. If you have vitiligo, particularly if you have light skin, use a broad-spectrum, water-resistant sunscreen with an SPF of at least 30. Apply sunscreen generously and reapply every two hours — or more often if you're swimming or perspiring. You can also seek shade and wear clothing that shields your skin from the sun. Protecting your skin from the sun helps prevent sunburn and long-term damage. A bad sunburn can make your condition worse. Sunscreen also minimizes tanning, which makes the contrast between normal and discolored skin less noticeable. 	Conceal affected skin. Concealing products may improve the appearance of the skin and help you feel better about yourself, especially if your vitiligo patches are on exposed skin. You may need to try several brands of makeup or self-tanners to find one that blends well with your normal skin tone. The coloring of self-tanning products doesn't wash off, but it gradually fades over several days. If you use a self-tanner, select one that contains dihydroxyacetone, as it is approved by the Food and Drug Administration. 	Don't get a tattoo. Avoid tattooing that's not related to treating your vitiligo. Damage to your skin, such as that caused by a tattoo, may cause a new patch of vitiligo to appear within two weeks. 	
Vocal cord paralysis|A breathy quality to the voice	Hoarseness	Noisy breathing	Loss of vocal pitch	Choking or coughing while swallowing food, drink or saliva	The need to take frequent breaths while speaking	Inability to speak loudly	Loss of your gag reflex	Ineffective coughing	Frequent throat clearing	|
Von Willebrand disease|Recurrent and prolonged nosebleeds	Bleeding from the gums	Increased menstrual flow	Excessive bleeding from a cut or following a tooth extraction or other dental procedure	Blood in the stool or urine	Bleeding from shaving with a razor or other similarly minor injury	|Switch pain relievers. To help prevent bleeding episodes, don't take blood-thinning medications — such as aspirin, ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin IB, others) or naproxen (Aleve, Anaprox) — without the approval of your doctor. Your doctor may recommend pain relievers such as acetaminophen (Tylenol, others) instead for routine aches and pains and for fever.	Tell your doctors and dentist. Let your doctors and dentist know that you have von Willebrand disease before you have any type of surgical procedure or receive a new medication prescription.	Stay active. Keep your weight at normal levels and stay physically active. However, avoid activities that could cause bruising (for example, football, wrestling and hockey). Safe activities that can keep your muscles flexible and joints healthy include walking, bicycling and swimming.	
Vulvar cancer|Itching that doesn't go away	Pain and tenderness	Bleeding that isn't from menstruation	Skin changes, such as color changes or thickening	A lump, wart-like bumps or an open sore (ulcer)	|
Vulvodynia|Burning	Soreness	Stinging	Rawness	Painful intercourse (dyspareunia)	Throbbing	Itching	|Try cold compresses. Cold compresses placed directly on your external genital area may help lessen pain and itching.	Soak in a sitz bath. Two to three times a day, sit in comfortable, lukewarm (not hot) or cool water for five to 10 minutes.	Avoid tightfitting pantyhose and nylon underwear. Tight clothing restricts airflow to your genital area, often leading to increased temperature and moisture that can cause irritation. Wear white, cotton underwear to increase ventilation and dryness. Sleep without underwear at night, if you feel comfortable doing so.	Avoid hot tubs and soaking in hot baths. Spending time in hot water may lead to discomfort and itching.	Avoid activities that put pressure on your vulva, such as biking or horseback riding.	Wash gently. Scrubbing the affected area harshly or washing too often can increase irritation. Instead, use plain water to gently clean your vulva with your hand and pat the area dry. After bathing, apply a preservative-free emollient, such as plain petroleum jelly, to create a protective barrier.	Use lubricants. If you're sexually active, apply a lubricant before engaging in sexual intercourse.	Try an antihistamine at bedtime. This may help reduce itching and help you rest better.	
Wheat allergy|Swelling, itching or irritation of the mouth or throat	Hives, itchy rash or swelling of the skin	Nasal congestion	Headache	Itchy, watery eyes	Difficulty breathing	Cramps, nausea or vomiting	Diarrhea	Anaphylaxis	|Keep others informed. If your child has wheat allergy, make sure that anyone who takes care of your child, including the principal, teachers and nurse at school, know about the allergy and the signs of wheat exposure. If your child carries epinephrine, make sure school personnel know how to use the pen, if necessary, and that they need to contact emergency care immediately. Inform friends, relatives and co-workers of your own food allergy.	Wear a bracelet. A medical identification bracelet that describes the allergy and need for emergency care can help if you experience anaphylaxis and can't communicate.	Always read labels. Don't trust that a product is free of what you can't eat until you read the label. Wheat proteins, especially gluten, are used as food thickeners, and they appear in many unexpected places. Also, don't assume that once you've used a certain brand of a product, that it's always safe. Ingredients change.	Shop for gluten-free foods. Some specialty stores and supermarkets offer gluten-free foods, which are safe for people with wheat allergies. However, they may also be free of grains that you can eat, so sticking to gluten-free foods may limit your diet for no reason.	Consult wheat-free cookbooks. Cookbooks specializing in recipes without wheat can help you cook safely and enable you to enjoy baked goods and other foods made with substitutes for wheat.	Dine out cautiously. Tell restaurant staff about your allergy and how serious it can be if you eat anything with wheat. Order simple dishes prepared with fresh foods. Avoid foods that may have hidden sources of wheat proteins, such as sauces, or deep-fried foods that may be cooked with other foods containing wheat.	
Whiplash|Neck pain and stiffness	Worsening of pain with neck movement	Loss of range of motion in the neck	Headaches, most often starting at the base of the skull	Tenderness or pain in shoulder, upper back or arms	Tingling or numbness in the arms	Fatigue	Dizziness	|
Whipple's disease|Diarrhea	Abdominal cramping and pain, which may worsen after meals	Weight loss, associated with the malabsorption of nutrients 	|
Whooping cough|Runny nose	Nasal congestion	Red, watery eyes	Fever	Cough	|Get plenty of rest. A cool, quiet and dark bedroom may help you relax and rest better.	Drink plenty of fluids. Water, juice and soups are good choices. In children, especially, watch for signs of dehydration, such as dry lips, crying without tears and infrequent urination.	Eat smaller meals. To avoid vomiting after coughing, eat smaller, more-frequent meals rather than large ones.	Clean the air. Keep your home free of irritants that can trigger coughing spells, such as tobacco smoke and fumes from fireplaces.	Prevent transmission. Cover your cough and wash your hands often; if you must be around others, wear a mask.	
Wilms' tumor|Abdominal swelling	An abdominal mass you can feel	Abdominal pain	Fever	Blood in the urine	|
Wilson's disease|Fatigue, lack of appetite or abdominal pain	Jaundice, a yellowing of the skin and the whites of the eye	A tendency to bruise easily	Fluid buildup in the legs or abdomen	Problems with speech, swallowing or physical coordination	Uncontrolled movements or muscle stiffness	|Liver	Shellfish	Mushrooms	Nuts	Chocolate	
Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome|Sensation of rapid, fluttering or pounding heartbeats (palpitations) 	Dizziness 	Lightheadedness 	Fainting 	Tiring easily during exercise 	Anxiety 	|
Wrist pain||Treatments and drugs	Prevention	
Yeast infection (vaginal)|Itching and irritation in the vagina and the tissues at the vaginal opening (vulva)	A burning sensation, especially during intercourse or while urinating	Redness and swelling of the vulva	Vaginal pain and soreness	Vaginal rash	Watery vaginal discharge	Thick, white, odor-free vaginal discharge with a cottage cheese appearance	|
Yellow fever|Fever	Headache	Muscle aches, particularly in your back and knees	Sensitivity to light	Nausea, vomiting or both	Loss of appetite	Dizziness	Red eyes, face or tongue	|
Zollinger-Ellison syndrome|Abdominal pain	Diarrhea	Burning, aching, gnawing or discomfort in your upper abdomen	Acid reflux and heartburn	Nausea and vomiting	Bleeding in your digestive tract	Unintended weight loss	Decreased appetite	|
